CHAPTER   I. 

PARENTAGE— EARLY  LIFE— 1736-1760. 


Parentage. — "Winstons,  Henrys,  Robertsons. — Patrick  Heniy's  Birth 
Youth,  Education. — Influence  of  Rev.  Samuel  Davies  on  Him. — 
Mercantile  Life. — Marriage. — Life  as  a  Farmer  and  Merchant. 
— Studies  Law. — Obtains  License  to  Practise. 


Within  the  first  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
three  brothers  of  the  ancient  and  honorable  family 
of  Winston,  of  Yorkshire,  England,^  emigrated  from 
Wales  to  the  Colony  of  Virginia.  They  ^v^ere 
named  William,  Isaac,  and  James,  and  from  them 
have  descended  a  numerous  posterity,  which  has  em- 
braced many  of  the  most  distinguished  of  American 
citizens.  Isaac  Winston  married  Mary  Dabney  and 
resided  in  the  County  of  Hanover.  Among  their 
children  was  a  daughter,  Sarah,  who  married  Col- 
onel John  Syme,  and  lived  in  the  same  county. 

There  also  emigrated  to  Virginia,  some  time  prior 
to  1730,  John  Henry,  the  son  of  Alexander  Henry 
and  Jean  Robertson,  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland.  John 
Henry  was  a  friend  of  Kobert  Dinwiddle,  who  be- 
came Governor  of  Virginia  in  1752,  and  it  is  said 

'  The  Duke  of  Marlborough  was  descended  from  the  Gloucestershire 
branch  of  the  family. 


PATRICK   HENRY. 


broucrlit  a  letter  of  introduction  from  liim  to  Colonel 
John  Syme.^  It  is  very  probable  that  the  families 
were  at  this  time  connected  in  Scotland,  and  that 
this  fact  caused  John  Henry  to  make  his  way  to 
Hanover  on  his  arrival  in  Virginia.  However  this 
may  be,  it  is  certain  that  he  soon  became  domesti- 
cated in  the  family  of  Colonel  Syme. 

The  author  is  indebted  to  Sir  Mitchell  Henry,  of 
Kylemore  Castle,  Galway,  Ireland,  for  years  a  dis- 
tinguished member  of  Parliament,  for  some  account 
of  the  Henry  family  of  Scotland.  He  writes  :  "  Al- 
thouo^h  the  recent  Henrvs  are  of  Scotch  extraction, 
the  family  was  originally  Norman,  and  will  be 
found  in  the  Livre  des  Con(]^uerants  of  William  the 
Conqueror ;  and  in  Brittany  there  are  many  Henrys, 
(not  Henri)  still  remaining.  Some  of  the  Henrys 
after  the  Conquest  settled  in  England,  and  some 
went  nortli  to  Scotland,  and  are  to  be  found  in  1158 
in  Hampshire,  Bedfordshire,  and  Surrey,  among  the 
latter  in  1196,  Alexander  filius  Henrici.  I  have  lit- 
tle doubt  tliat  if  anyone  would  take  the  trouble  to 
do  it,  a  very  complete  history  of  the  family  name 
could  be  traced,  as  their  names  occur  in  the  roll  of 
Battle  Abbey,  and  in  Domesday  Book,  and  in  the 
Great  Rolls  of  the  Pipe,  1153."  Of  his  own  family 
he  writes:  "The  branch  from  which  I  descended 
came  from  Scotland  to  Ireland  in  the  year  1616,  at 
the  plantation  of  Ulster,  and  settled  as  substantial 
yeomen  at  Loughbrickland,  County  Down,  which 
they  still  possess.  The  names  of  Alexander,  Pat- 
rick, Archibald,  and  Hugh  were  common  with  them. 
There  are  other  Henrys  in  Ireland,  who  have  a  peli- 
can as  coat  of  arras,  of  whom  Hugh  Henry,  of  Straf- 

'  Wirt's  Life  of  Patrick  Henry,  20,  edition  of  1836. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  3 

fan,  was  the  representative,  and  married  into  the 
family  of  the  Duke  of  Leicester.  The  late  Sir 
Thomas  Henry,  the  chief  magistrate  of  London, 
lately  dead,  was  a  Plenry  professing  the  Roman  Cath- 
olic religion,  and  the  son  of  William  Henry,  of  Dub- 
lin, who  was  employed  in  a  romantic  attempt  to  res- 
cue Marie  Antoinette  from  prison  and  the  scaffold."^ 

John  Henry,  the  emigrant,  was  second  cousin  to 
David  Henry,  Avho,  leaving  Scotland  for  London  at 
the  age  of  fourteen,  became  a  journeyman  printer  in 
the  same  office  with  Benjamin  Franklin,  and  after- 
ward married  the  sister  of  Edward  Cave,  the  foun- 
der of  the  ''  Gentleman's  Mao-azine."  He  was  for 
more  than  fifty  years  an  associate  editor  of  that  val- 
uable publication,  and  was  an  accomplished  scholar 
and  writer.  David  Henry  described  his  Henry  kin 
in  Scotland  as  '^  more  respected  for  their  good  sense 
and  superior  education  than  for  their  riches ;  as  at 
every  neighboring  meeting  of  gentlemen  they  were 
among  the  foremost."  ' 

Jean  Robertson,  the  mother  of  John  Henry,  was  a 
sister  of  Rev.  William  Robertson,  the  father  of  Dr. 
William  Robertson,  the  distinguished  scholar,  his- 
torian, and  divine.^  One  of  the  sisters  of  Dr.  Rob- 
ertson married  a  Syme,  doubtless  a  relation  of  Col- 
onel John  Syme,  of  Virginia.  She  was  the  mother 
of  Eleanor  Syme,  the  mother  of  Henry  Brougham, 
who  considered  himself  indebted  to  her  for  his  tal- 
ents.'* The  Robertsons  were  descendants  of  the 
Duncans  of  Scotland,  and  William  Robertson  was 
said  to  have  had  the  blood  of  John   Knox  in  his 

'  MS.  letter  dated  September  21,  187G.         ^  "  Gentleman's  Magazine." 
^  She  is  sometimes  represented  as  a  sister  of  Dr.  Robertson,  but  the 
dates  of  birth  of  his  sisters  disprove  this. 

*  Life  and  Times  of  Lord  Brougham,  written  by  himself,  i.,  17. 


PATRICK   HENRY. 


veins.^  Donald,  a  younger  brother  of  Jean  Robert- 
son, emigrated  to  Virginia,  and  conducted  a  classi- 
cal school  in  King  and  Queen  County,  at  which 
James  Madison  was  prepared  for  Princeton  College. 
Madison  referred  to  him  in  after-life  as  his  "  learned 
teacher."  ^  Donald  Robertson  was  related  to  the 
late  learned  Chief-Justice  of  Kentucky,  George 
Robertson. 

John  Henry  was  a  man  of  classical  education. 
The  Rev.  Samuel  Davies,  himself  a  finished  classical 
scholar,  describes  him  as  a  man  more  familiar  with 
his  Horace  than  with  his  Bible.^  He  was  by  no 
means  deficient,  however,  in  his  knowledge  of  the 
latter,  as  is  abundantly  shown  by  a  letter  to  his 
brother,  the  Rev.  Patrick  Plenry,  which  has  been 
preserved.  In  it  he  refers  to  a  discussion  going  on 
between  himself.  Colonel  Richard  Bland,  and  Com- 
missary Blair  upon  the  doctrine  of  eternal  punish- 
ment, which  he  defends  by  a  critical  examination  of 
the  Greek  text  of  the  New  Testament.^  He  is  de- 
scribed by  his  acquaintances  as  a  man  of  plain  but 
solid  understanding,  a  zealous  member  of  the  Estab- 
lished Church,  and  warmly  attached  to  the  reigning 
family.  He  led  a  life  of  irreproachable  integrity 
and  exemplary  piety,  and  won  the  full  confidence  of 
the  community  in  which  he  lived.  He  filled  the 
ofifices  of  county  surveyor  and  presiding  magistrate 
of  the  county  of  Hanover,  and  was  colonel  of  its 
regiment  of  militia.  As  their  commanding  officer  he 
convened  the  militia  at  the  Court  House,  and  cele- 
brated the  coronation  of  George  the  Third  by  mak- 

*  Life  and  Times  of  Lord  Brougham,  written  by  himself,  i.,  32. 

2  Riv«s*s  Madison,  i. ,  10.      ^  Grigsby's  Virginia  Convention  of  1776,  145. 

"*  "Evangelical  Magazine,"  iii.,  173. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE. 


ing  them  perform  a  number  of  evolutions,  and  burn 
a  quantity  of  gunpowder,  little  dreaming  that  a  son 
of  his  would  be  instrumental  in  separating  America 
from  his  Majesty's  dominions. 

Colonel  John  Syme  died  in  the  year  1731,  as 
near  as  can  be  ascertained,  leaving  one  child,  a  son, 
and  a  most  attractive  widow,  who  has  been  so  well 
described  by  Colonel  William  Byrd,  of  Westover, 
that  the  passage  may  well  be  transcribed.  In  his 
"  Progress  to  the  Mines,"  under  date  of  October  7, 
1732,  he  writes: 

"  In  the  evening  Tinsley  conducted  me  to  Mrs. 
Syme's  house,  where  I  intended  to  take  up  my 
quarters.  This  lady,  at  first  suspecting  I  was  some 
lover,  put  on  a  gravity  which  becomes  a  weed,  but 
so  soon  as  she  learned  who  I  was,  brightened  up 
into  an  unusual  cheerfulness  and  serenity.  She  was 
a  portly,  handsome  dame  of  the  family  of  Esau,  and 
seemed  not  to  pine  too  much  for  the  death  of  her 
husband,  who  was  of  the  family  of  the  Saracens. 
He  left  a  son  by  her,  who  has  all  the  strong  feat- 
ures of  his  sire,  not  softened  in  the  least  by  any  of 
hers. 

"  This  widow  is  a  person  of  a  lively  and  cheerful 
conversation,  with  much  less  reserve  than  most  of 
her  countrywomen.  It  becomes  her  well,  and  sets 
off  her  other  agreeable  qualities  to  advantage.  We 
tossed  off  a  bottle  of  honest  port,  which  we  relished 
with  a  broiled  chicken."  On  the  next  day,  he  adds, 
"  I  moistened  my  clay  with  a  quart  of  milk  and  tea, 
which  I  found  altogether  as  great  a  help  to  dis- 
course as  the  juice  of  the  grape.  The  courteous 
widow  invited  me  to  rest  myself  there  that  good 
day,  and  go  to  church  with  her,  but  I  excused  my- 
self by  telling  her  she  would  certainly  spoil  my 
devotions.     Then  she  civilly  entreated  me  to  make 


6  PATRICK  HENRY. 

her  house  my  home  whenever  I  visited  my  planta- 
tions, w^hich  made  me  bow  low  and  thank  her  very 
kindly." 

As  Colonel  Byrd  was  not  only  an  accomplished 
scholar,  but  was  one  of  the  wittiest  men  in  the  col- 
ony, it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  gravity 
of  the  young  widow  was  disturbed  by  his  polished 
humor.  The  cheerfulness  of  which  he  speaks  never 
left  her,  and  if  not  at  that  time,  she  soon  became, 
a  devoted  Christian.  She  is  described  as  a  woman 
of  remarkable  intellectual  gifts,  with  an  unusual 
command  of  language,  and  as  happily  uniting  firm- 
ness with  gentleness  in  the  management  of  her 
family,  before  which  she  set  an  example  of  fervent 
piety.  Her  talents,  indeed,  seemed  a  family  posses- 
sion; certainly  her  brother,  William  Winston,  was 
a  person  of  great  powers  of  eloquence,  as  the  fol- 
lowing account  of  him  in  a  letter  of  Nathaniel  Pope 
to  Mr.  Wirt  attests. 

"  I  have  often  heard  my  father,  who  was  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  this  William  Winston,  say, 
that  he  was  the  greatest  orator  whom  he  ever  heard, 
Patrick  Henry  excepted  ;  that  during  the  last  French 
and  Indian  War,  and  soon  after  Braddock's  defeat, 
when  the  militia  were  marched  to  the  frontier  of 
Virginia  against  the  enemy,  this  William  Winston 
was  the  lieutenant  of  a  company;  that  the  men, 
who  were  indifferently  clothed,  without  tents,  and 
exposed  to  the  rigor  and  inclemency  of  the  weather, 
discovered  gi*eat  aversion  to  the  service,  and  were 
anxious,  and  even  clamorous,  to  return  to  their 
families,  when  this  William  Winston,  mounting  a 
stump,  addressed  them  with  such  keenness  of  invec- 
tive, and  declaimed  with  such  force  of  eloquence  on 


PARENTAGPJ— EARLY   LIFE. 


liberty  and  patriotism,  that  when  lie  concluded  the 
general  cry  was,  '  Let  us  march  on ;  lead  us  against 
the  enemy  ! '  and  they  were  now  willing,  nay,  anx- 
ious, to  encounter  all  those  difficulties  and  dangers, 
which,  but  a  few  moments  before,  had  almost  pro- 
duced mutin}^."  ^ 


Not  many  months  after  this  visit  of  Colonel 
Byrd,  Mrs.  Syme  married  John  Henry.  Their  resi- 
dence was  Studley,  in  Hanover  County,  the  home 
of  Mrs.  Henry  before  marriage,  situated  three  miles 
from  Hanover  town  and  sixteen  from  Hichmond. 
The  dwelling  has  long  since  disappeared,  and  its  site 
is  marked  by  antique  hedges  of  box,  approached 
through  an  avenue  of  aged  trees.  The  spot  is  suj-- 
rounded  by  a  forest,  which  is  devoid  of  picturesque 
scenery,  but  which  makes  it  literally  true  that  the 
subject  of  this  memoir  was  "forest-born."  ^  A  few 
miles  distant  are  the  "  Slashes  of  Hanover,"  famous 
as  the  birthplace  of  Henry  Clay. 

There  were  nine  children  born  to  John  Henry  and 
Sarah  Winston,  two  sons  and  seven  daughters,  and 
from  them  has  sprung  a  numerous  progeny,  includ- 
ing many  persons  of  distinction.^  The  daughters 
are  described  as  being  nearly  all  of  them  very 
gifted.  The  first  son  was  named  William,  after 
Mrs.  Henry's  brother ;  the  second,  born  May  29, 
1736,  was  named  Patrick,  after  the  Rev.  Patrick 
Henry,  the  brother  of  John  Henry.  This  gentleman 
had  been  induced  to  come  to  Virginia  by  his 
brother,  through  whose  influence  he  had  been  made 
rector  of  St.  George's  parish,  in  Spottsylvania 
County,  in  April,  1733.     On  June  11,  1736,  he  be- 

'  Wirt's  Henry,  21.        ^  ^ord  Byron  so  calls  him  in  The  Age  of  Bronze. 
^  See  Appendix  I. 


PATRICK   HENRY. 


came  rector  of  St.  Paul's  parish,  in  Hanover  County. 
On  the  same  day  the  Vestry  Book  records  that  John 
Henry  was  chosen  one  of  the  vestry,  and  sold  to 
the  parish  a  tract  of  land  containing  three  hundred 
and  forty-eight  acres,  called  Mount  Pleasant,  as  a 
glebe.^  The  two  brothers,  who  were  tenderly  at- 
tached to  each  other,  afterward  lived  not  far  apart. 

While  Patrick  Henry  was  still  an  infant  his 
parents  removed  to  another  home  in  the  same  coun- 
ty, on  the  South  Anna  River,  near  Rocky  Mills,  and 
about  twenty-two  miles  from  Richmond.  This  new 
home  was  then  called  Mount  Brilliant,  but  after- 
ward became  known  as  The  Retreat. 

Here  Patrick  Henry  spent  his  youth,  and  received 
his  education.  As  that  youth  has  been  represented 
as  having  been  thrown  away  in  idleness,  it  is  fortu- 
nate that  the  account  of  it  given  by  his  brother-in- 
law,  Colonel  Samuel  Meredith,  has  been  preserved. 
Colonel  Meredith  was  four  years  his  senior,  and 
lived  within  four  miles  of  him.     He  says : 

"  He  was  sent  to  a  common  English  school  until 
about  the  age  of  ten  years,  where  he  learned  to 
read  and  write,  and  acquired  some  little  knowledge 
of  arithmetic.  He  never  went  to  any  other  school, 
public  or  private,  but  remained  with  his  father,  who 
was  his  only  tutor.  With  him  he  acquired  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  Latin  language,  and  a  smattering  of  the 
G-reek.  He  became  well  acqainted  with  mathe- 
matics, of  which  he  was  very  fond.  At  the  age 
of  fifteen  he  was  well  versed  in  both  ancient  and 
modern  history.  Until  he  attained  to  eminence  at 
the   bar,    there   was   nothing  very   remarkable   in 

*  Extract  from  Vestry  Book,  published  in  "  The  Southern  Churchman," 
April  22,  1886. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE. 


the  person,  mind,  or  manners  of  Mr.  Henry.  Ilis 
disposition  was  very  mild,  benevolent,  and  humane. 
He  was  quiet,  and  inclined  to  be  thoughtful,  but 
fond  of  society.  From  his  earliest  days  he  was  an 
attentive  observer  of  everything  of  consequence 
that  passed  before  him.  Nothing  escaped  his  at- 
tention. He  was  fond  of  reading,  but  indulged 
much  in  innocent  amusements.  He  was  remarkably 
fond  of  his  gun.  He  interested  himself  much  in 
the  happiness  of  others,  particularly  of  his  sisters, 
whose  advocate  he  always  was  when  any  favor  or 
indulgence  was  to  be  procured  from  their  mother. 
In  his  youth  he  seemed  regardless  of  the  appearance 
of  his  outside  dress,  but  was  unusually  attentive  in 
having  clean  linen  and  stockings.  He  was  not  re- 
markable for  an  uncouth  or  a  genteel  appearance  in 
his  youth.  In  fact,  there  was  nothing  in  early  life 
for  which  he  was  remarkable,  except  his  invariable 
habit  of  close  and  attentive  observation.  He  had  a 
nice  ear  for  music,  and  when  he  was  about  the  age 
of  twelve  he  had  his  collar-bone  broken,  and  during 
the  coniinement  learned  to  play  very  well  on  the  flute. 
He  was  also  an  excellent  performer  on  the  violin. 
He  was  in  early  youth,  as  in  advanced  life,  plain  and 
easy  in  his  manners,  exempt  from  that  bashfulness 
often  so  distressing  to  young  persons  who  have  not 
seen  much  company.  His  father  often  said  that  he 
w^as  one  of  the  most  dutiful  sons  that  ever  lived, 
and  his  sister,  Mrs.  Meredith,  states,  that  he  was 
never  known  in  his  life  to  utter  the  name  of  God, 
except  on  a  necessary  or  proper  occasion.''  ^ 

Another  of  Mr.  Henry's  early  companions  writes  : 

*'  He  was  delighted  with  the  ^  Life  and  Opinions  of 
Tristram  Shandy,'  which  I  have  known  him  to  read 

'MS.  Narrative  of  Colonel  Samuel  Meredith,  taken  down  by  Judge 
WiUiam  H.  CabeU  and  sent  to  Mr.  Wirt. 


10   .  PATRICK  HENRY. 

several  hours  together,  lying  with  his  back  upon  a 
bed.  He  had  a  most  retentive  memory,  making 
whatev^er  he  read  his  own.  I  never  heard  him  quote 
verbatim  any  passages  from  history  or  poetry,  but 
he  would  give  you  the  fact  or  sentiment  in  his  own 
expressive  language.  He  had  a  most  extraordinary 
talent  for  collecting  the  sentiments  of  his  company 
upon  any  subject,  without  discovering  his  own,  and 
he  would  effect  this  by  interrogations  which  to  the 
company  often  appeared  to  be  irrelevant  to  the  sub- 
ject." ' 

It  was  also  the  testimony  of  several  of  his  early 
companions,  "  that  he  was  remarkably  fond  of  fun, 
but  that  his  fun  was  innocent,  and  he  never  discov- 
ered in  any  one  action  of  his  childhood  or  youth  the 
least  spice  of  ill-nature  or  malevolence ;  also  that  he 
was  remarkably  fond  of  hunting,  fishing,  and  play- 
ing on  the  violin."  ^ 

From  the  statement  of  Patrick  Henry  in  after- 
life, we  learn  that  at  fifteen  he  had  read  Virgil  and 
Livy  in  the  original ;  ^  and  from  some  sentences  in 
French  written  by  him  in  a  law  book,  in  1760,  it 
appears  that  he  must  have  been  taught  something 
of  that  language.  He  also'  told  Judge  Hugh  Nel- 
son, that  a  little  later  in  life  he  made  it  a  rule  to 
read  a  translation  of  Livy  through  every  year.'* 

The  character  given  of  young  Patrick  Henry  by 
his  companions  indicates  the  careful  religious  train- 
ing he  received  from  his  pious  parents.  In  addition 
to  this  it  was  his  good  fortune  in  his  youth  to  come 
under  the  influence  of  a  man  of  the  highest  order  of 

'  MS.  Letter  of  Nathaniel  Pope  to  Mr.  Wirt,  September  27,  1805,  giving 
statement  of  Captain  George  Dabney. 

^  Id.  3  Diary  of  John  Adams,  Life  and  Works,  ii.,  396. 

*  Wirt's  Henry,  31. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  11 

genius  and  of  the  deepest  piety.  Tliis  was  the  cele- 
brated pulpit  orator,  Samuel  Davies.  The  circum- 
stances leading  to  the  residence  in  the  County  of 
Hanover  of  this  gifted  man,  who  exercised  so  marked 
an  influence  over  the  future  of  Patrick  Henry,  are 
full  of  interest. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  many 
of  the  ministers  of  the  Established  Church  in  Virginia 
had  become  very  unfaithful  to  the  religion  of  the 
Bible,  both  in  their  preaching  and  their  manner  of 
life.^  Far  removed  from  the  eye  of  their  diocesan, 
the  Bishop  of  London,  and  often  mere  clerical  ad- 
venturers, who  had  sought  positions  in  the  colony 
from  mercenary  motives,  they  not  only  did  not 
preach  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  with  faithfulness 
themselves,  but  they  were  unwilling  that  their  par- 
ishioners should  hear  it  from  other  lips.  They  were 
therefore  careful  that  the  laws  against  absenting 
one's  self  from  Episcopal  services,  and  against  at- 
tending the  preaching  of  Dissenters,  should  be  rigor- 
ously enforced  in  their  parishes. 

In  the  county  of  Hanover,  about  the  year  1740, 
four  gentlemen,  who  had  been  very  regular  in  their 
attendance  at  church,  becoming  convinced  that  the 
parish  minister  was  not  preaching  the  gospel,^  ab- 
sented themselves  from  church  the  same  day,  but 
without  preconcert.  Summoned  before  the  magis- 
trate to  answer  for  their  conduct,  each  learned  for 
the  first  time  that  three  of  his  neighbors  were  un- 
der the  like  condemnation  with  himself.    They  bore 

'  See  this  brought  out  in  Bishop  Meade's  Old  Churches  and  Families 
of  Virginia. 

-  This  minister  was  no  doubt  the  rector  of  St.  Martin's  pariah,  and 
possibly  Rev.  Robert  Barrett.     See  Meade's  Old  Churches,  i.,  420. 


12  .  PATRICK  HENRY. 

their  fines  patiently,  and  afterward  met  regularly  in 
their  private  houses  on  the  Sabbath,  and  read  what 
few  religious  books  they  could  get,  delighting  mostly 
in  some  volumes  of  Luther.  Soon  the  attendance 
became  too  large  for  a  private  house,  and  they  built 
houses  of  worship,  calling  them  "  Morris's  Reading 
Houses,"  ^  after  Samuel  Morris,  on  whose  land  the 
first  was  built.  From  this  beginning  was  developed 
the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Hanover,  which  soon  ex- 
tended over  all  the  colony  between  the  mountains 
and  the  sea-shore. 

Isaac  Winston,  the  father  of  Mrs.  John  Henry, 
was  probably  one  of  the  four  gentlemen  who  ab- 
sented themselves  from  the  parish  church.  If  not, 
he  soon  joined  them,  for  we  find  him  indicted  in  the 
General  Court,  held  by  the  Governor  and  Council, 
October  19,  1745,  for  permitting  the  Rev.  John 
Roane,  a  dissenting  ministei*,  to  preach  at  his  house.^ 

In  1743  Rev.  William  Robinson,  an  eminent 
Presbyterian  minister,  was  sent  by  the  Presbytery 
of  Newcastle,  as  an  evangelist  to  visit  the  churches 
in  Virginia.  He  preached  to  the  Dissenters  in  Han- 
over, and  on  leaving  they  expressed  their  gratitude 
by  presenting  him  with  a  considerable  sum  of  money. 
This  he  declined,  but  when  he  found  that  they  had 
put  it  into  his  saddle-bags,  he  consented  to  keep  it, 
if  he  were  allowed  to  use  it  in  educating  a  young 
man  to  be  sent  to  them  as  a  minister.  The  young 
man  he  selected  was  Samuel  Davies.^  He  was 
educated  at  the  famous  classical  school  of  Samuel 
Blair,  at  Fogg's  Manor,  in  Pennsylvania,  and  came  to 
Hanover  in  1747,^  after  first  obtaining  from  the  Gov- 

'  Foote's  Sketches  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Virginia,  122-3. 
2  Id.,  141-2  and  161.  ^i^,^  129.  *  Id.,  160. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  13 

ernor  and  Council  the  benefit  of  the  toleration  act, 
by  which  he  was  permitted  to  exercise  his  ministry 
unmolested.  He  continued  to  preach  in  Hanover 
and  the  surrounding  counties,  until  lie  was  called 
to  the  presidency  of  Princeton  in  1759.  This  min- 
istry of  twelve  years  was  only  interrupted  by  a 
mission  to  England  in  behalf  of  an  endowment  for 
the  college,  which  was  entered  upon  in  the  fall  of 
1753,  and  lasted  fifteen  months.  So  successful  was 
he  in  his  labors  in  the  ministry,  that  he  is  justly  re- 
garded as  "  the  father  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in 
Virginia ; "  and  his  contemporaries  declared  that  he 
was  "the  prince  of  American  preachers,"  and  sec- 
ond only  as  a  pulpit  orator  to  the  great  Whitefield. 
In  person  he  was  tall,  well  proportioned,  erect,  and 
comely ;  his  carriage  easy,  graceful,  and  dignified ; 
his  dress  neat  and  tasteful,  and  his  manners  pol- 
ished. A  distinguished  Virginian  well  expressed 
the  impression  his  appearance  made,  who,  seeing 
him  walk  throuo^h  a  courtyard,  remarked  that  "  he 
looked  like  the  embassador  of  some  great  king." 
He  was  endo^ved  with  a  voice  st]*ong,  clear,  and 
musical,  a  memory  from  which  nothing  seemed  to 
escape,  a  powerful  yet  delicate  imagination,  a  per- 
fect command  of  strong,  ornate,  and  perspicuous  dic- 
tion, and  an  animation  in  delivery  which  lighted 
up  his  features,  pervaded  every  look,  gesture,  and 
movement,  and  seemed  to  blend  the  simplicity  of 
nature  with  the  highest  culture  of  art.  Indeed,  his 
manner  of  delivery  as  to  pronunciation,  gesture,  and 
modulation  of  voice  was  a  perfect  model  of  the  most 
moving  and  striking  oratory,  while  the  sublimity 
and  elegance,  simplicity  and  perspicuity  of  his  dis- 
courses, rendered  his  sermons  not  only  models  for 


14    •  PATRICK   HENRY. 

all  who  heard  them,  l)iit  for  posterity  as  well,  foi- 
whom,  happily,  many  of  them  have  been  preserved. 
Whenever  this  august  and  venerable  person  ascended 
the  sacred  desk,  he  seized  the  attention  and  com- 
manded all  the  various  passions  of  his  audience, 
and  imparted  to  tlie  discourse  a  solemnity  which 
could  never  be  forgotten.  A  true  patriot,  he  em- 
ployed his  great  gifts  in  cheering  up  his  countrymen 
after  the  depressing  defeat  of  Braddock  in  1755, 
and  the  first  volunteer  company  raised  in  Virginia, 
after  that  crushing  disaster,  was  from  his  congrega- 
tions, the  result  of  a  patriotic  discourse  delivered 
July  20, 1755.  Before  this  company,  commanded  by 
Captain  Overton,  he  preached  August  17,  1755,  and 
in  appealing  to  the  martial  spii'it  of  his  hearers  he 
made  prophetic  mention  of  the  young  officer  who 
had  saved  the  command  of  Braddock  from  annihila- 
tion. He  said  :  "  As  a  remarkable  instance  of  this,  I 
may  point  out  to  the  public,  that  heroic  youth,  Col- 
onel Washington,  whom  I  cannot  but  hope  Provi- 
dence has  hitherto  preserved  in  so  signal  a  manner 
for  some  important  service  to  his  country."  ^ 

An  anecdote  is  related  of  him  which  shows  his 
fearlessness  as  a  preacher.  It  is  said  that  while  he 
was  in  London  King  George  II.,  attracted  by  his 
reputation,  attended  one  of  his  services.  He  was  so 
pleased  that  he  expressed  himself  to  those  sitting 
near  him,  to  the  great  interruption  of  the  service. 
Finally  Mr.  Davies  fixed  his  eye  upon  him,  and  said, 
with  great  solemnity  :  "  When  the  lion  roareth,  the 
beasts  of  the  forests  tremble ;  when  the  Lord  speak- 
eth,  let  the  kings  of  the  earth  keep  silence."     The 

^  For  some  account  of  Mr.  Davies  and  his  work,  see  Foote's  Sketches 
of  Virginia. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  15 


King  shrank  back  in  liis  seat  and  remained  quiet 
during  the  remainder  of  the  discourse,  and  next  day 
sent  for  Mr.  Davies  and  gave  him  fifty  guineas  for 
the  college,  observing  at  the  same  time  to  his  cour- 
tiers, "  He  is  an  honest  man  !  an  honest  man  !  "  ^ 

It  was  under  the  influence  of  such  a  man  that 
Patrick  Henry  came  at  the  impressible  age  of 
twelve.  One  of  the  places  at  which  Mr.  Davies 
preached  was  known  as  "  the  Fork  Church,"  and 
here  Mrs.  John  Henr}^,  who  l)ecame  a  member  of 
his  church,  attended  reo;ularlv.  She  was  in  the 
habit  of  ridinix  in  a  double  s^io^  takins:  with  her 
young  Patrick,  who,  from  the  first,  sho^ved  a  high 
appreciation  of  the  preacher.  Returning  from 
church  she  would  make  him  c^ive  the  text  and  a  re- 
capitulation  of  the  discourse.  She  could  have  done 
her  son  no  greater  service.  His  sympathetic  gen- 
ius ^^'as  not  only  aroused  by  the  eloquence  of  the 
preacher,  Avho,  he  ever  declared,  was  "  the  greatest 
oi-ator  he  ever  heard,"  but  he  learned  from  him 
that  robust  system  of  theology  which  is  known  as 
Calvinism,  and  which  lias  furnished  to  the  world 
so  many  of  her  greatest  characters — a  system  of 
which  Froude  writes :  "  It  has  been  able  to  inspire 
and  sustain  the  bravest  efforts  ever  made  by  man 
to  break  the  yoke  of  unjust  authority,  .  .  .  has 
borne  ever  an  inflexible  front  to  illusion  and  men- 
dacity, and  has  preferred  rather  to  be  ground  to 
powder,  like  flint,  than  to  bend  before  violence,  oi- 
melt  under  enervating  temptation."  ^ 

Althouo-h  Mr.  Whitefield  visited  Hanover  durinir 
one  of  his  American  tours,  it  is   probable  that  Pat- 

'  Howe's  Virginia  Historical  Collections,  294. 

-  Address  to  the  Students  at  St.  Andrews,  March  17,  1871, 


16  PATRICK   HENRY. 

rick  Henry  was  too  young  to  have  appreciated  him, 
and  he  had  reached  manhood  before  James  Wad- 
dell,  the  eloquent  blind  preacher,  entered  the  minis- 
try.^ His  early  example  of  eloquence,  therefore, 
was  Mr.  Davies,  and  the  efEect  of  his  teaching  upon 
his  after  life  may  be  plainly  traced.  Although  he 
never  withdrew  from  the  Episcopal  Church,  in 
which  he  was  baptized,  he  became  the  persistent 
advocate  of  religious  liberty.  Colonel  Meredith 
says  of  him  :  "  He  was  through  life  a  warm  friend 
of  the  Christian  religion.  He  was  an  Episcopalian, 
but  very  friendly  to  all  sects,  particularly  the  Pres- 
byterian. His  father  was  an  Episcopalian,  his 
mother  a  Presbyterian."  ^ 

When  about  the  age  of  fifteen  Patrick  Henry 
was  placed  by  his  father  with  a  merchant  of  the 
county,  in  order  that  he  miglit  be  trained  for  mer- 
cantile life.  After  a  year's  experience  he  and  his 
brother  William  were  set  up  in  business  in  a  coun- 
try store,  with  a  stock  of  goods  purchased  for  them 
by  their  father.  Patrick,  though  the  younger,  was 
equally  interested,  and  was  indeed  the  principal 
manager.  The  brothers  were  too  indulgent  in  grant- 
ing credit,  and  one  year  was  enough  to  embarrass 
the  business  and  cause  its  discontinuance.  Upon 
Patrick  devolved  the  care  of  winding  up  this  short- 
lived firm,  and  while  he  was  thus  engaged,  in  the 
fall  of  1754,  before  he  was  nineteen  years  of  age, 
he  was  married  to  Sarah,  a  daughter  of  John  Shel- 
ton,  who  lived  in  the  part  of  the  county  known  as 
the  Fork.  His  wife  was  an  estimable  woman,  of 
most  excellent  parentage,  and  brought  him  six  ne- 

1  This  was  in  1761.     Foote's  Sketches  of  Virginia,  351. 

2  MS.  Narrative  sent  to  Mr.  Wirt. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  17 

groes  and  a  tract  of  poor  land,  containing  three 
hundred  acres,  called  Pine  Slash,  and  adjoining  her 
father's  place.^  His  parents  gave  him  some  little 
property  besides,  and  with  this  start  in  the  world 
he  attempted  to  support  himself  by  agriculture.  It 
is  probable  that  most  of  the  negroes  given  him 
were  very  young,  as  we  find  him  forced  to  labor  on 
his  farm  with  his  own  hands.^  In  the  year  1757  he 
lost,  by  an  accidental  fire,  his  dwelling-house  and 
the  greater  part  of  his  furniture.  He  thereupon 
sold  some  of  his  negroes  to  repair  his  loss  and  to  buy 
a  small  stock  of  goods,  with  which,  early  in  1758^  he 
opened  a  country  store,^  hoping  with  his  farm  and 
store  to  secure  a  support  for  his  growing  family. 
His  mercantile  business  was  small,  even  for  a  coun- 
try store,  and  was  conducted  by  a  clerk.^  Unfor- 
tunately he  did  not  profit  by  his  previous  experience 
in  the  matter  of  credit,  as  many  of  his  accounts  ap- 
pear to  have  been  uncollected.  The  business  con- 
tinued for  about  two  years,  and  his  cash  sales  only 
footed  up  £39  6s.  3d.  This  was  doubtless  due  to 
the  failure  in  the  tobacco  crop  in  1759,  upon  which 
the  planters  were  dependent  for  money.  At  the  end 
of  two  years  he  found  his  capital  gone  and  himself 
in  debt,  but  not  insolvent,  as  has  been  represented. 
His  business  had  been  too  limited  for  that  result, 
and  we  have  his  statement,  late  in  life,  that  he  was 
never  sued  for  a  debt  of  his  own. 

It  was  during  this  critical  period  of  his  life  that 
we  are  permitted  to  see   him    as   he   appeared  to 

'  Entry  of  Patrick  Henry  in  his  account  book. 
-  MS.  Letter  of  Judge  Edmund  Winston  to  Mr.  Wirt. 
^  MS.  Statement  of  Colonel  Meredith  sent  to  Mr.  Wirt. 
*  This  appears  by  the  handwriting  in  the  ledger  in  possession  of  the 
author. 

2 


18  PATRICK  HENRY. 

Thomas  Jefferson,  who  has  left  an  account  of  their 
first  meeting.  One  of  Mr.  Henry's  nearest  neigh- 
bors and  warmest  friends  was  Captain  Nathaniel 
West  Dandridge,  formerly  of  the  British  navy,  who 
was  a  great-grandson  of  Captain  John  West,  brother 
of  Thomas  West,  Lord  Delaware,  and  who  had  mar- 
ried Dorothea,  daughter  of  Governor  Alexander 
Spotswood.  He  was  a  man  of  large  means,  and,  as 
was  the  custom  of  the  colony,  very  hospitable.  It 
was  at  his  house  that  Patrick  Henry  and  Thomas 
Jefferson  first  met.  The  following  is  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son's account  of  the  meeting  : 

"  My  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Henry  commenced 
in  the  winter  of  1759-1760.  On  my  way  to  the 
College  1  passed  the  Christmas  holidays  at  Colonel 
Dandridge's,  in  Hanover,  to  whom  Mr.  Henry 
was  a  near  neighbor.  During  the  festivity  of  the 
season  I  met  him  in  society  every  day,  and  we  be- 
came well  acquainted,  although  I  was  much  his  jun- 
ior, being  then  in  my  seventeenth  year  and  he  a 
married  man.  His  manners  had  something  of 
coarseness  in  them ;  his  passion  was  music,  danc- 
ing, and  pleasantry.  He  excelled  in  the  last,  and  it 
attached  everyone  to  him.'  You  ask  some  account 
of  his  mind  and  information  at  this  period,  but  you 
will  recollect  that  we  were  almost  continually  en- 
gaged in  the  usual  revelries  of  the  season.  The  oc- 
casion, perhaps,  as  much  as  his  idle  disposition,  pre- 
vented his  engaging  in  any  conversation  which 
might  give  the  measure  either  of  his  mind  or  in- 
formation. Opportunity  was  not,  indeed,  wholly 
wanting,  because  Mr.  John  Campbell  was  there, 
who  had  married  Mrs.  Spotswood,  the  sister  of  Colo- 
nel Dandridge.  He  was  a  man  of  science  and  often 
introduced  conversation  on  scientific  subjects.  Mr. 
Henry  had,  a  little  before,  broken  up  his  store — or. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  19 

rather,  it  had  broken  him  up ;  but  his  misfortunes 
were  not  traced,  either  in  his  countenance  or  con- 
duct." ' 

This  account  was  given  to  Mr.  Wirt  after  Mi\ 
Jefferson  had  become  an  old  man,  and  a  political 
opponent  of  Mr.  Henry,  and  his  statements  concern- 
ing him  must  be  taken  with  due  allowance.  Mr. 
Jefferson  is  certainly  inaccurate  in  stating  that  "  Mr. 
Henry  had,  a  little  before,  broken  up  his  store,  or 
rather  it  had  broken  him  up."  Mr.  Henry's  ledger 
shows  that  the  store  was  not  closed  before  July, 
1760,  and  the  closing-out  sale  of  the  remnant  of  his 
goods  was  made  to  one  firm,  Crenshaw  &  Grant, 
September  19,  1760. 

It  was  doubtless  after  he  had  become  aware  that 
the  store  and  farm  combined  would  not  support  his 
family,  that  Mr.  Jefferson  met  him.  His  cheerfuh 
ness  of  mind  was  not  the  result  of  callousness  as  to 
his  affairs,  but  of  a  cheerful  and  self-reliant  spirit 
which  no  misfortune  could  benumb.  Before  he 
closed  his  mercantile  venture  he  had  determined  to 
try  the  profession  of  the  law,  for  which  he  was  con- 
scious of  at  least  one  qualification,  a  knowledge  of 
human  nature.  Tliis  his  habit  of  close  observation 
and  ample  opportunities  as  a  merchant  had  given 
him  in  a  remarkable  degree.  While  doubtless 
drawn  to  the  profession  by  some  fancy  for  its  con- 
tests, he  was  not  yet  aware  of  the  genius  which  it 
was  to  develop  in  him.  Says  Judge  Edmund  Win- 
ston, his  first  cousin  and  contemporary  :  "  He  may 
be  considered  to  have  been  at  this  time  a  virtuous 
young  man,  unconscious  of  the  powei'S  of  his  own 

Wirt's  Henry,  32-3. 


20  PATRICK  HENRY. 

mind,  and  in  very  narrow  circumstances,  making  a 
last  effort  to  supply  the  wants  of  his  family."  ^ 

The  necessity  which  drove  him  to  this  step  proved 
an  incalculable  blessing,  and  when,  late  in  life,  he 
wrote  the  following  to  a  young  friend,  who  had 
been  unfortunate  in  business,  he  crystallized  into 
one  of  the  gems  of  English  literature  his  own  expe- 
rience. Said  he  :  "  Looking  forward  into  life  and  to 
those  prospects  which  seem  to  be  commensurate 
with  your  talents,  native  and  acquired,  you  may 
justly  esteem  those  incidents  fortunate  which  com- 
pel an  exertion  of  mental  power,  maturity  of  which 
is  rarely  seen  growing  out  of  an  uninterrupted  tran- 
quillity. Adversity  toughens  manhood,  and  the 
characteristic  of  the  good  or  the  great  man,  is  not 
that  he  has  been  exempted  from  the  evils  of  life, 
but  that  he  has  surmounted  them."  ^  Havins:  de- 
termined  to  enter  the  profession,  he  borrowed  a  "  Coke 
upon  Littleton,"  and  a  "  Digest  of  the  Virginia  Acts." 
These  he  read  in  a  month  or  six  weeks,  by  close  ap- 
plication, and  then,  upon  the  advice  of  John  Lewis, 
a  prominent  lawyer  of  the  county,  he  rode  to  Will- 
iamsburg and  appeared  before  the  Board  of  Exam- 
iners as  an  applicant  for  license.  Although  his  re- 
tentive memory  enabled  him  to  use  what  he  had 
read,  so  circumscribed  had  been  his  course,  that  the 
examiners,  before  whom  he  appeared  separately, 
were  said  to  have  been  reluctant  to  sign  his  license. 
His  experience  with  one  of  them,  the  accomplished 
John  Randolph,  afterward  Attorney-General  for  the 
colony,  was  related  by  Mr.  Henry  subsequently  to 

1  MS.  Letter  to  Mr.  Wirt. 

'From  "The  Southern  Literary  Messenger,"  xix.,  317.     The  letter  is 
dated  June  2,  1793. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  21 

his  friend,  Judge  John  Tyler.  Mr.  Randolph,  ac- 
cording to  Judge  Tyler,  was  not  at  first  pleased  with 
his  appearance  in  his  plain  country  clothes,  and  was 
indisposed  to  examine  him  at  all,  but  learning  that 
he  already  had  two  signatures  he  reluctantly  con- 
sented to  ask  him  some  questions. 

Mr.  Wirt,  in  giving  Judge  Tyler's  account,  says : 

"  A  very  short  time  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  him  of 
the  erroneous  conclusion  which  he  had  drawn  from 
the  exterior  of  the  candidate.  With  evident  marks 
of  increasing  surprise  (produced,  no  doubt,  by  the 
peculiar  texture  and  strength  of  Mr.  Henry's  style, 
and  the  boldness  and  originality  of  his  combinations,) 
he  continued  the  examination  for  several  hours ;  in- 
terrogating the  candidate,  not  on  the  principles  of 
municipal  law,  in  which  he  no  doubt  soon  discovered 
his  deficiency,  but  on  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  na- 
tions, on  the  policy  of  the  feudal  system,  and  on  gen- 
eral history,  which  last  he  found  to  be  his  stronghold. 
During  the  very  short  portion  of  the  examination 
which  was  devoted  to  the  common  law,  Mr.  Ran- 
dolph dissented,  or  affected  to  dissent,  from  one  of 
Mr.  Henry's  answers,  and  called  upon  him  to  assign 
the  reasons  for  his  opinions.  This  produced  an  ar- 
gument ;  and  Mr.  Randolph  now  played  off  on  him 
the  same  arts  which  he  himself  had  so  often  prac- 
tised on  his  customers,  drawing  him  out  by  ques- 
tions, endeavoring  to  puzzle  him  by  subtleties,  as- 
sailing him  with  declamation,  and  watching  continu- 
ally the  defensive  operations  of  his  mind.  After  a 
considerable  discussion,  he  said  :  '  You  defend  your 
opinions  well,  sir,  but  now  to  the  law  and  to  the  testi- 
mony.' Hereupon  he  carried  him  to  his  office,  and 
opening  the  authorities  he  said  to  him :  '  Behold 
the  force  of  natural  reason ;  you  have  never  seen 
these  books,  nor  this  principle  of  the  law ;  yet  you 


22     •  PATRICK   HENRY. 

are  riglit  and  I  am  wrong ;  and  from  this  lesson 
which  you  have  given  me  (you  must  excuse  me  for 
saying  it,)  I  will  never  trust  to  appearances  again. 
Mr.  Henry,  if  your  industry  be  only  half  equal  to 
your  genius  I  augur  that  you  will  do  well,  and  be- 
come an  ornament  and  an  honor  to  your  profes- 
sion.' "  ^ 

Mr.  Jefferson  has  given  two  accounts  of  this  ex- 
amination, not  entirely  consistent  with  each  other.^ 
In  one  of  them,  that  given  to  Mr.  Wirt,  after  relating 
their  meeting  at  Colonel  Dandridge's  in  the  winter 
of  1759-60,  he  says  : 

"  The  spring  following  he  came  to  Williamsburg  to 
obtain  a  license  as  a  lawyer,  and  he  called  on  me  at 
college.  He  told  me  he  had  been  reading  law  only 
six  weeks.  Two  of  the  examiners,  however,  Peyton 
and  John  Randolph,  men  of  great  facility  of  temper, 
signed  his  license  with  as  much  reluctance  as  their 
dispositions  would  permit  them  to  show.  Mr.  Wythe 
absolutely  refused.  Robert  C.  Nicholas  refused  also 
at  first,  but  on  repeated  importunity  and  promises 
of  future  reading,  he  signed.  These  facts  I  had 
afterward  from  the  gentlemen  themselves,  the  two 
Randolphs  acknowledging  he  was  very  ignorant  of 
law,  but  that  they  perceived  him  to  be  a  young 
man  of  genius  and  did  not  doubt  he  would  soon 
qualify  himself."  ^ 

In  1824,  some  ten  years  later,  Mr.  Jefferson  said 
to  Daniel  Webster  and  the  Ticknors  at  Monticello : 

"  There  were  four  examiners,  Wythe,  Pendleton, 
Peyton  Randolph,  and  John  Randolph.     Wythe  and 

1  Wirt's  Henry,  34. 

2  See  these  compared  in  Tyler's  Life  of  Patrick  Henry,  21. 

3  Memorandum  for  Mr.  Wirt.  "  Historical  Magazine,"  August,  1867, 
90. 


PARENTAGE— EARLY   LIFE.  23 

Pendleton  at  once  rejected  Lis  application  ;  the  two 
Eandolphs  were,  by  his  importunity,  prevailed  upon 
to  sign  the  license ;  and  having  obtained  their  signa- 
tures, he  again  applied  to  Pendleton,  and  after  much 
entreaty  and  many  promises  of  future  study,  suc- 
ceeded also  in  obtaining:  his.  He  then  turned  out 
for  a  practising  lawyer."  ^ 

Doubtless  the  account  given  Mr.  Wirt  by  Judge 
Tyler  is  the  most  correct  of  these.  It  is  very  cer- 
tain that  Mr.  Henry  was  poorly  prepared  to  stand 
an  examination  by  the  learned  lawyers  who  consti- 
tuted the  board.  But,  however  ignorant  of  his  la- 
tent powers,  it  is  clear  that  he  was  already  recognized 
as  a  man  of  uncommon  intellectual  gifts. 

'  Curtis's  Life  of  Webster,  i.,  584.
