PRACTICAL  CHRISTIANITY 
April  2,  1881 

TRANSLATED   BT   EDMUND   VON    MACH,    PH.D. 

[Prince  Bismarck  was  trying  to  fight  the  revolutionary  parties,  not  only 
with  such  restrictive  laws  as  had  been  passed  against  the  Socialists,  but 
also  with  constructive  measures  like  the  one  which  had  been  submitted  to 
the  Reichstag  on  March  8,  1881.  It  proposed  the  insurance  of  the  work- 
ingman  against  accidents,  and  ^he  founding  of  a  governmental  insurance 
company.  The  bill  was  severely  criticized,  notably  by  Eugen  Richter, 
who  did  not  miss  the  opportunity  of  attacking  also  the  chancellor  per- 
sonally. Prince  Bismarck's  reply  made  a  deep  impression  in  the  country 
at  large.  The  bill  itself,  however,  was  so  badly  amended  in  the  Reich- 
stag, that  Bismarck  urged  the  Bundesrat  to  reject  it,  which  it  did.  Sev- 
eral changes,  thereupon,  were  made  in  the  bill,  and,  after  having  been 
delayed  in  committee,  it  was  again  brought  up  for  discussion  in  1884,  when 
another  exhaustive  speech  by  the  chancellor,  on  March  15,  brought  about 
its  acceptance.] 

[EFORE  turning  to  the  subject  in  hand,  I  wish  to 
reply  to  some  remarks  of  the  previous  speaker, 
lest  I  forget  them — they  are  of  so  little  weight. 
He  finished  by  saying  that  my  prestige  wa& 
•  waning.  If  he  were  right,  I  should  feel  like 
saying  "Thank  God,"  for  prestige  is  a  very  burdensome 
affair.  One  suffers  under  its  weight,  and  quickly  gets  tired 
of  it.  I  do  not  care  a  farthing  for  it.  When  I  was  very 
much  younger,  about  as  old  as  the  previous  speaker  is  now, 
and  when  I  was  possibly  still  more  ambitious  than  he,  I 
lived  for  years  without  prestige,  and  was  actually  disliked, 
if  not  hated,  by  the  majority  of  my  fellow-citizens.  At 
that  time  I  felt  better  and  more  contented,  and  was 
healthier  than  during  the  years  when  I  was  most  popular. 

[221] 


222  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

Such  things  do  not  mean  much  to  me.  I  am  doing  my  duty, 
let  come  what  may. 

As  proof  of  his  assertion  the  previous  speaker  claimed 
that  the  workingmen  are  refusing  the  help  which  the  Im- 
perial Government  is  trying  to  offer  them.  This  he  cannot 
possibly  know.  He  has  no  idea  of  what  the  great  mass  of 
the  workingmen  are  thinking.  Probably  he  has  some  accu- 
rate information  of  what  the  eloquent  place-hunters  are 
thinking  of  the  bill,  people  who  are- at  the  head  of  the  labor 
movements,  and  the  professional  publicists,  who  need  a 
following  of  workingmen — dissatisfied  workingmen.  But 
as  to  the  workingman  in  general,  we  had  better  wait  and 
see  what  he  is  thinking.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  full 
meaning  of  this  question  has  even  yet  sufficiently  penetrated 
into  his  circles  to  make  it  a  subject  of  discussion,  except 
in  the  learned  clubs  of  laborers,  and  among  the  leading 
place-hunters  and  speakers.  In  the  next  election  we  shall 
be  able  to  tell  whether  the  workingmen  have  formed  their 
opinion  of  the  bill  by  then,  not  to  speak  of  now. 

The  legislation  on  which  we  are  entering  with  this  bill 
has  to  do  with  a  question  which  will  probably  stay  on  your 
calendar  for  a  long  while.  The  previous  speaker  has  cor- 
rectly said  that 1 1  it  opens  up  a  very  deep  perspective, ' '  and 
it  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  it  may  also  make  the  mod- 
erate Socialists  judge  more  kindly  of  the  government.  We 
have  been  talking  of  a  social  question  for  fifty  years;  and, 
since  the  passage  of  the  law  against  the  Socialists,  I  have 
been  constantly  reminded,  officially,  from  high  quarters, 
and  by  the  people,  that  we  gave  a  promise  at  that  time. 
Something  positive  should  be  done  to  remove  the  causes 
for  Socialism,  in  so  far  as  they  are  legitimate.  I  have 
received  such  reminders  daily.  Nor  do  I  believe  that  this 
social  question,  which  has  been  before  us  for  fifty  years 
now,  will  be  definitely  settled  even  by  our  children  and 
children's  children.  No  political  question  ever  reaches  so 
complete  a  mathematical  solution  that  the  books  can  be 
balanced.  Such  questions  arise,  abide  a  while  and  finally 


SPEECHES  223 

give  way  to  other  historical  problems.     This  is  the  way 
of  organic  developments. 

I  deem  it  my  duty  to  take  up  this  question  quietly  and 
without  party  vehemence,  because  I  do  not  know  who  else 
could  do  this  successfully  if  not  the  Imperial  Govern- 
ment. It  is  a  pity  that  party  questions  should  be  mixed 
up  in  it.  The  previous  speaker  has  referred  to  a  sup- 
posedly active  exchange  of  telegrams  between  '  *  certain  par- 
ties" and  "an  high  official,"  which  in  this  case,  I  must 
believe,  means  me.  I  am  mentioning  this,  in  passing,  be- 
cause he  said  the  same  thing  a  few  days  ago  in  another 
speech.  Gentlemen,  this  is  a  very  simple  matter.  I  receive 
thousands  of  telegrams ;  and,  being  a  polite  man,  I  should 
probably  reply  also  to  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Eichter,  if  he 
were  to  honor  me  with  a  friendly  despatch.  When  I  am 
cordially  addressed  in  a  message,  I  have  to  reply  in  cordial 
terms.  I  cannot  possibly  have  the  police  ascertain  to  what 
party  the  senders  belong.  Nor  am  I  so  diffident  in  my  views 
that  I  should  wish  to  catechize  the  senders  as  to  their  po- 
litical affiliations.  If  anybody  takes  pleasure  in  making 
me  appear  to  be  a  member  of  anti-semitic  societies,  let  him 
do  so.  I  have  kept  away  from  all  undesirable  movements, 
as  my  position  demands,  and  I  could  wish  that  also  you  gen- 
tlemen would  refrain  more  than  heretofore  from  inciting 
the  classes  against  each  other,  and  from  oratorical  phrases 
which  fan  class-hatred.  This  refers  especially  to  those 
gentlemen  who  have  bestowed  their  kind  attention  upon  the 
Government  and  upon  me  personally.  When  we  heard  the 
representative,  Mr.  Lasker,  say  the  other  day  that  the  pol- 
icy of  the  government  was  aristocratic,  this  term  was  bound 
to  render  the  whole  aristocracy  and  what  belongs  to  it  sus- 
pected of  selfishness  in  the  eyes  of  the  poor  men,  at  whose 
expense  the  aristocracy  seemingly  exists.  When  such  ex- 
pressions fall  on  anti-semitic  ground,  how  is  it  possible  to 
avoid  reprisals  ?  The  anti-semites  will  coin  their  own  word 
with  which  to  designate — as  they  think  appropriately — the 
policies  opposed  to  ours.  The  resulting  epithet  I  do  not 


224  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

care  to  mention;  every  one  will  think  of  it  himself.  When 
afterwards  a  newspaper  like  the  Tribune,  which  is  said  to 
be  owned  by  Mr.  Bamberger,  makes  itself  the  mouthpiece 
of  Mr.  Lasker's  expression,  claiming  it  to  be  correct,  and 
hailing  the  invention  of  this  word  as  a  discovery  worthy 
of  Columbus,  and  when  the  Tribune  finally  asserts  that 
"care  for  the  poor"  and  "aristocracy"  cannot  exist  in 
the  same  train  of  thought,  can  you  not  imagine  what  will 
happen  when  all  this  is  turned  around,  and  altered  by  an 
anti-semite?  Are  you  in  doubt  what  he  will  substitute  for 
"aristocracy,"  and  do  you  not  know  that  he  will  repeat 
every  twist  and  turn  of  speech  with  which  Mr.  Bamberger 's 
sheet  imputes  selfish  injustice  to  the  aristocracy? 

The  representative  Mr.  Richter  has  called  attention  to 
the  responsibility  of  the  State  for  everything  it  does  in  the 
field  on  which  it  is  entering  today.  Well,  gentlemen,  I 
feel  that  the  State  may  become  responsible  also  for  the 
things  it  does  not  do.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  "laissez 
faire,  laissez  alter,  theory,"  and  the  unadulterated  political 
theories  of  Manchester,  such  as  "let  each  one  do  what  he 
chooses,  and  fare  as  he  will,"  or  "who  is  not  strong  enough 
to  stand,  let  him  be  crushed,"  or  "he  who  has  will  receive 
more,  and  he  who  has  not  from  him  let  us  take,"  can  be 
practised  in  any  State,  least  of  all  in  a  monarchical  State, 
governed  by  the  father  of  his  country.  On  the  contrary, 
I  believe  that  those  who  shudder  at  the  State  exerting  its 
influence  for  the  protection  of  the  weaker  brethren,  them- 
selves intend  to  capitalize  their  strength — be  it  financial, 
rhetorical,  or  what  not — that  they  may  gain  a  following, 
or  oppress  the  rest,  or  smooth  their  own  way  to  party  con- 
trol. They  become  angry,  of  course,  as  soon  as  their  plans 
are  spoiled  by  the  rising  influence  of  the  State. 

The  representative  Mr.  Richter  says  this  legislation  does 
not  go  far  enough.  If  he  will  have  patience,  we  may  per- 
haps be  able  to  satisfy  him  a  little  later — one  should  not 
be  hasty  or  try  to  do  everything  at  once!  Such  laws  are 
not  made  arbitrarily  out  of  theories  and  as  the  result  of 


SPEECHES  225 

asking  "what  kind  of  law  would  it  be  wise  to  make  now?" 
They  are  the  gradual  outgrowth  of  earlier  events.  The 
reason  why  we  come  to  you  today  only  with  an  accident- 
insurance  law  is  because  this  branch  of  the  care  of  the  poor 
and  the  weak  was  especially  vigorous  even  before  I  seri- 
ously concerned  myself  with  such  matters.  Requests,  sug- 
gestions, and  notes  for  such  a  bill  were  on  file  when  I  as- 
sumed office.  According  to  the  records  this  bill  was  needed 
more  than  any  other.  When  I  began  to  study  it,  I  must 
confess  that  it  did  not  seem  to  me  to  go  far  enough  in  the- 
ory, and  that  I  was  tempted  to  change  the  words  which 
occur,  I  believe  in  the  first  paragraph,  '  *  every  workingman 
who ' '  and  '  *  shall  be  reimbursed  in  such  and  such  a  way, ' ' 
to  read, ' '  every  German. ' '  There  is  something  ideal  in  this 
change.  If  one  thinks  of  it  more  seriously,  however,  and 
especially  if  one  plans  to  include  also  the  independent  work- 
men, who  meet  with  an  accident  at  no  one 's  behest  but  their 
own,  the  question  of  insurance  is  even  more  difficult.  No 
two  hours'  speech  of  any  representative  can  give  us  so 
much  concern  as  this  problem  has  given  us:  "How  far  is 
it  possible  to  extend  this  law  without  creating  at  the  very 
start  an  unfavorable  condition,  or  reaching  out  too  far 
and  thus  overreaching  ourselves?"  As  a  farmer  I  was 
tempted  to  ask,  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  extend  the 
insurance,  for  instance,  also  to  the  farmhands,  who  con- 
stitute the  majority  of  the  workingmen  in  our  eastern  prov- 
inces. I  shall  not  give  up  hope  that  this  may  be  possible, 
but  there  are  difficulties,  which  for  the  time  being  have  pre- 
vented us  from  doing  this ;  and  concerning  these  I  wish  to 
say  a  few  words. 

The  farming  industry,  in  so  far  as  it  has  to  do  with  ma- 
chinery and  elemental  forces,  is,  of  course,  not  excluded 
from  the  law.  But  the  remaining  great  majority  of  the 
country  population  also  comes  in  frequent  contact  with  ma- 
chines, although  these  are  set  in  motion  not  by  elemental 
forces,  but  by  horses  or  fellow-laborers.  Such  occupations 
are  often  dangerous  and  unwholesome,  but  it  is  exceed- 

VOL.  X— 15 


226  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

ingly  difficult  to  gather  statistics  and  percentages,  and  to 
define  the  necessary  amount  of  contributions  to  an  insur- 
ance fund.  The  representative  Mr.  Richter  knows,  appar- 
ently from  experience,  the  proper  percentage  in  every 
branch  of  human  occupation,  for  he  has  quoted  his  figures 
with  much  assurance.  I  should  be  grateful  to  him  if  he 
would  mention  also  the  source  of  his  valuable  information. 
We  have  done  the  best  we  could.  The  preliminary  drafts 
of  the  bill  were  based  on  carefully  selected  facts — notice 
please,  selected  facts,  and  not  arbitrary  statistics  based 
on  conjecture.  If  we  had  discovered  those  figures,  which 
the  quicker  eye  of  the  honorable  Mr.  Richter  seems  to  have 
detected  at  a  glance,  and  if  we  had  believed  them  to  be  ac- 
curate, we  should  have  gone  further  in  this  bill. 

When  I  say  that  I  do  not  give  up  hope  that  the  farming 
industry  may  yet  be  included,  I  am  thinking  of  an  organi- 
zation which  cannot  be  created  at  one  session  of  the  Reichs- 
tag. Like  the  child  which  must  be  small  if  it  is  to  be  born 
at  all,  and  which  gradually  assumes  its  proper  proportions 
by  growth,  so  also  this  organization  will  have  to  develop 
gradually.  Eventually  the  various  branches  of  industry 
which  have  insured  their  laborers  should  be  formed  into 
incorporated  associations,  and  each  association  should  raise 
among  its  own  members  the  premiums  needed  for  the 
proper  insurance  of  its  laborers.  It  should  at  the  same  time 
exercise  supervision  over  its  members  to  the  extent  that 
the  dues  should  be  as  low  as  possible.  Or,  to  put  it  differ- 
ently, the  personal  interest  of  the  contributing  members 
should  see  to  it  that  adequate  means  for  the  prevention 
of  accidents  are  adopted.  If  this  can  be  accomplished  by 
a  gradual  advance  based  on  experience,  we  may  also  hope 
to  find,  by  experience,  the  proper  percentage  as  regards 
that  branch  of  farming  which  does  not  employ  elemental 
forces. 

Our  lack  of  experience  in  these  matters  has  also  induced 
us  to  be  very  careful  about  the  assessment  of  the  neces- 
sary contributions.  I  certainly  should  not  have  the  courage 


SPEECHES  227 

to  press  this  bill  if  the  expenses  which  it  entails  were  to 
be  borne  exclusively  by  the  various  industries.  If  the  as- 
sistance which  the  State  would  render — either  by  provincial 
or  county  associations,  or  directly — were  to  be  entirely 
omitted,  I  should  not  dare  to  answer  to  our  industries  for 
the  consequences  of  this  law.  Perhaps  this  can  be 
done,  and  after  a  few  years  of  experience  we  may  be 
able  to  judge  whether  it  is  possible.  The  State  contri- 
bution, therefore,  may  be  limited  at  first  to  three  years, 
or  to  whatever  period  you  wish.  But  without  any 
actual  experience,  without  any  practical  test  of  what 
we  are  to  expect,  I  do  not  dare  to  burden  our  industries 
with  all  the  expenses  of  this  government-institution,  and 
to  add  to  their  taxes.  I  do  not  dare  to  place  upon  them 
the  whole  burden  of  caring  for  the  injured  factory  or  mill 
hands.  The  county  associations  used  to  do  this,  and  in  the 
future  it  will  be  done  more  fully  and  in  a  more  dignified  way 
by  the  insurers  and  the  State. 

No  entirely  new  charges  are  here  contemplated;  the 
charges  are  merely  transferred  from  the  county  associa- 
tions to  the  State.  I  do  not  deny  that  the  tax  of  him  who 
pays  and  the  advantages  which  accrue  to  the  laborer  will 
be  increased.  The  increase,  however,  does  not  equal  the  full 
third  which  the  State  is  to  bear,  but  only  the  difference 
between  what  at  present  the  county  associations  are  obliged 
to  do  for  the  injured  workingmen,  and  what  these  men  will 
receive  in  future.  You  see,  it  is  purely  a  question  of 
improving  the  lot  of  the  laboring  man.  This  difference, 
therefore,  is  the  only  new  charge  on  the  State,  with  which 
you  have  to  reckon.  And  you  will  have  to  ask  yourselves : 
"Is  the  advantage  gained  worth  this  difference, — when  we 
aim  to  procure  for  the  laborer  who  has  been  injured  a 
better  and  more  adequate  support,  and  relieve  him  of  the 
necessity  of  having  to  fight  for  his  right  in  court,  and 
when  he  will  receive  without  delay  the  moderate  stipend 
which  the  State  decrees?"  I  feel  like  answering  t^e  ques- 
tion with  a  strong  affirmative. 


228  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

Our  present  poor  laws  keep  the  injured  laboring  man 
from  starvation.  According  to  law,  at  least,  nobody  need 
starve.  Whether  in  reality  this  never  happens  I  do  not 
know.  But  this  is  not  enough  in  order  to  let  the  men  look 
contentedly  into  the  future  and  to  their  own  old  age.  The 
present  bill  intends  to  keep  the  sense  of  human  dignity 
alive  which  even  the  poorest  German  should  enjoy,  if  I 
have  my  way.  He  should  feel  that  he  is  no  mere  eleemosy- 
nary, but  that  he  possesses  a  fund  which  is  his  very  own. 
No  one  shall  have  the  right  to  dispose  of  it,  or  to  take  it 
from  him,  however  poor  he  may  be.  This  fund  will  open 
for  him  many  a  door,  which  otherwise  will  remain  closed 
to  him  and  it  will  secure  for  him  better  treatment  in  the 
house  where  he  has  been  received,  because  when  he  leaves 
he  can  take  away  with  him  whatever  contributions  he  has 
been  making  to  the  household  expenses. 

If  you  have  ever  personally  investigated  the  conditions 
of  the  poor  in  our  large  cities,  or  of  the  village  paupers 
in  the  country,  you  have  been  able  to  observe  the  wretched 
treatment  which  the  poor  occasionally  receive  even  in  the 
best  managed  communities,  especially  if  they  are  physically 
weak  or  crippled.  This  happens  in  the  houses  of  their  step- 
mothers, or  relatives  of  any  kind,  yes  also  in  those  of  their 
nearest  of  kin.  Knowing  this,  are  you  not  obliged  to  con- 
fess that  every  healthy  laboring  man,  who  sees  such  things, 
must  say  to  himself :  * '  Is  it  not  terrible  that  a  man  is  thus 
degraded  in  the  house  which  he  used  to  inhabit  as  master 
and  that  his  neighbor's  dog  is  not  worse  off  than  he?" 
Such  things  do  happen.  What  protection  is  there  for  a 
poor  cripple,  who  is  pushed  into  a  corner,  and  is  not  given 
enough  to  eat?  There  is  none.  But  if  he  has  as  little  as 
100  or  200  marks  of  his  own,  the  people  will  think  twice 
before  they  oppress  him.  We  have  been  in  a  position  to 
observe  this  in  the  case  of  the  military  invalids.  Although 
only  five  or  six  dollars  are  paid  every  month,  this  actual 
cash  amounts  to  something  in  the  household  where  the 


SPEECHES  229 

poor  are  boarded,  and  the  thrifty  housewife  is  careful  not 
to  offend  or  to  lose  the  boarder  who  pays  cash. 

I,  therefore,  assure  you  that  we  felt  the  need  of  insisting 
by  this  law  on  a  treatment  of  the  poor  which  should  be 
worthy  of  humanity.  Next  year  I  shall  be  able  fully  to 
satisfy  Mr.  Bichter  in  regard  to  the  amount  and  the  ex- 
tent of  attention  which  the  State  will  give  to  a  better  and 
more  adequate  care  of  all  the  unemployed.  This  will  come 
as  a  natural  consequence,  whether  or  no  the  present  bill 
is  passed.  Today  this  bill  is  a  test,  as  it  were.  We  are 
sounding  to  see  how  deep  the  waters  are,  financially,  into 
which  we  are  asking  the  State  and  the  country  to  enter. 
You  cannot  guard  yourselves  against  such  problems  by 
delivering  elegant  and  sonorous  speeches,  in  which  you 
recommend  the  improvement  of  our  laws  of  liability,  with- 
out in  the  least  indicating  how  this  can  be  done.  In  this 
way  you  cannot  settle  these  questions,  for  you  are  acting 
like  the  ostrich,  who  hides  his  head  lest  he  see  his  danger. 
The  Government  has  seen  its  duty  and  is  facing,  calmly 
and  without  fear,  the  dangers  which  we  heard  described 
here  a  few  days  ago  most  eloquently  and  of  which  we  were 
given  convincing  proofs. 

We  should,  however,  also  remove,  as  much  as  possible,  the 
causes  which  are  used  to  excite  the  people,  and  which  alone 
render  them  susceptible  to  criminal  doctrines.  It  is  imma- 
terial to  me  whether  or  no  you  will  call  this  Socialism.  If 
you  call  it  Socialism,  you  must  have  the  remarkable  wish 
of  placing  the  Imperial  Government,  in  so  far  as  this  bill 
of  the  allied  governments  is  concerned,  in  the  range  of  the 
very  critique  which  Mr.  von  Puttkamer  passed  here  on 
the  endeavors  of  the  Socialists.  It  would  then  almost  seem 
that  with  this  bill  only  a  very  small  distance  separated  us 
from  the  murderous  band  of  Hasselmann,  the  incendiary 
writings  of  Most,  and  the  revolutionary  conspiracies  of  the 
Congress  of  Wyden;  and  that  even  this  distance  would 
soon  disappear.  Well,  gentlemen,  this  is,  of  course,  the 
very  opposite  of  true.  Those  who  fight  with  such  oratorical 


230  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

and  meaningless  niceties  are  counting  on  the  many  mean- 
ings of  the  word  "socialism."  As  a  result  of  the  kind  of 
programs  which  the  Socialists  have  issued,  this  term  is, 
in  our  public  opinion  today,  almost  synonymous  with 
"criminal."  If  the  government  endeavors  to  treat  the 
injured  workingmen  better  in  the  future,  and  especially 
more  becomingly,  and  not  to  offer  to  their  as  yet  vigorous 
brethren  the  spectacle,  as  it  were,  of  an  old  man  on  the 
dump  heap  slowly  starving  to  death,  this  cannot  be  called 
socialistic  in  the  sense  in  which  that  murderous  band  was 
painted  to  us  the  other  day.  People  are  playing  a  cheap 
game  with  the  shadow  on  the  wall  when  they  call  our  en- 
deavors socialistic. 

If  the  representative  Mr.  Bamberger,  who  took  no  offense 
at  the  word  "Christian,"  wishes  to  give  a  name  to  our 
endeavors  which  I  could  cheerfully  accept,  let  it  be :  "  Prac- 
tical Christianity,"  but  sans  phrase,  for  we  shall  not  pay 
the  people  with  words  and  speeches,  but  with  actual  im- 
provements. Yet,  death  alone  is  had  for  the  asking.  If 
you  refuse  to  reach  into  your  pocketbook,  or  that  of  the 
State,  you  will  not  accomplish  anything.  If  you  should 
place  the  whole  burden  on  the  industries,  I  do  not  know 
whether  they  could  bear  it.  Some  might  be  able  to  do  it, 
but  not  all.  Those  who  could  do  it  are  the  industries  where 
the  wages  are  but  a  small  fraction  of  the  total  cost  of 
production.  Among  such  I  mention  the  chemical  factories, 
and  the  mills  which  with  twenty  mill  hands  can  do  an  an- 
nual business  of  several  million  marks.  The  great  mass  of 
laborers,  however,  does  not  work  in  such  establishments, 
which  I  am  tempted  to  call  aristocratic — without  wishing 
to  excite  any  class-hatred.  They  are  in  industries  where 
the  wages  amount  to  80  or  90  per  cent,  of  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction. Whether  the  latter  can  bear  the  additional  burden 
I  do  not  know. 

It  is,  moreover,  perfectly  immaterial  whether  the  as- 
sessment is  made  on  the  employer  or  on  the  employee.  In 
either  case  the  industry  will  have  to  bear  it,  for  the  con- 


SPEECHES  231 

tribution  of  the  laborer  will  eventually,  and  of  necessity, 
be  added  to  the  expenses  of  the  industry.  There  is  a  gen- 
eral complaint  that  the  average  wages  of  the  laborers  make 
the  saving  of  a  surplus  impossible.  If  you  wish,  therefore, 
to  add  a  burden  to  the  laborers  whose  present  wages  are 
no  more  than  sufficient,  the  employers  will  have  to  increase 
the  wages,  or  the  laborers  will  leave  them  for  other  occupa- 
tions. 

The  previous  speaker  called  the  bill  defective,  because 
the  principle  of  relieving  the  laborer  from  all  contributions 
had  not  been  consistently  followed ;  and  he  spoke  as  if  this 
principle  had  not  been  at  all  followed.  Laborers,  receiving 
more  than  750  marks  in  three  hundred  working  days,  are, 
it  is  true,  not  affected  by  it;  and  this  is  due  to  the  origin 
of  the  bill.  The  first  draft  read  that  one-third  of  the  con- 
tributions should  be  made  by  those  county  associations 
which  would  have  to  support  the  injured  man  in  con- 
formity with  the  poor-laws  of  the  State.  We  did  not  wish 
merely  to  make  a  gift  to  these  associations,  which  at  pres- 
ent are  responsible  for  80  per  cent,  of  all  injured  working- 
men,  that  is  for  those  who  do  not  come  under  the  law  of 
liability.  We,  therefore,  accepted  as  just  the  proposition 
that  these  associations  should  pay  one-third  toward  the 
insurance  of  those  men  who  formerly  would  have  become 
their  charges.  Laborers,  however,  whose  pay  is  large 
enough  to  keep  them  from  becoming  public  charges,  when 
they  meet  with  an  accident,  hold  an  exceptional  position. 
I  am,  nevertheless,  perfectly  willing  to  drop  this  exception 
in  the  bill,  as  I  have  said  repeatedly.  But  since  the  Reichs- 
tag in  its  entirety  has  thus  far  placed  itself  on  record  as 
opposed  to  any  contribution  from  the  State,  I  should  not 
gain  thereby  any  votes  for  the  bill.  I  wish  to  declare, 
however,  that  this  limit  of  750  marks  is  of  no  consequence 
compared  with  the  theory  on  which  the  bill  is  based.  It 
arose  from  a  sense  of  justice  toward  the  county  associa- 
tions, which  were  not  to  be  burdened  with  higher  taxes  than 
would  equal  their  savings  under  this  bill.  Later  it  was  dis- 


232  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

covered  from  many  actual  examples  that  the  insurance 
according  to  the  existing  county  associations  was  impos- 
sible, because  the  State,  which  really  is  responsible  for 
the  care  of  the  poor,  had  distributed  it  in  an  arbitrary 
and  unjust  way  on  the  various  county  associations.  Small 
and  weak  country  communities  are  often  overburdened 
with  the  care  of  poor  people,  while  large  and  wealthy  com- 
munities may  have  practically  no  charges,  since  the  geo- 
graphical position  alone  has  determined  the  membership  in 
the  various  county  associations.  The  result,  therefore, 
of  levying  the  necessary  contributions  on  these  associations 
would  have  been  a  very  uneven  distribution  of  the  assess- 
ments. Being  convinced  of  this,  I  suggested  the  substitu- 
tion of  "provincial  association"  for  "county  association"; 
and  thus  the  bill  read  for  several  weeks,  until  we  yielded  to 
the  wishes  of  the  allied  states  and  of  the  Economic  Coun- 
cil, and  left  to  each  state  the  question  whether  it  wished 
to  take  the  place  of  these  various  associations  or  preferred 
to  call  upon  them  in  any  way  it  chose.  These  are  the  steps 
by  which  we  reached  the  750  mark  exemption,  and  the  un- 
conditional share  which  is  to  be  paid  by  the  State.  This 
share  is  nothing  but  a  hint  to  the  legislature  how  to  dis- 
tribute the  care  of  the  poor  to  the  various  county — and 
other  associations.  Whatever  is  done,  you  will  agree  with 
me  that  we  n,eed  a  revision  of  our  poor-laws.  Just  how 
this  will  eventually  be  accomplished  is  immaterial  to  me. 
I  am  not  astonished  that  the  most  divergent  views  are 
held  on  this  new  subject,  which  touches  our  lives  very  in- 
timately, and  which  no  experience  has  as  yet  illuminated. 
Because  of  this  divergence  of  opinion  I  am  also  aware  that 
we  may  be  unable  to  pass  an  acceptable  law  at  this  ses- 
sion. My  own  interest  in  this  entire  work  would  be  very 
much  lessened  if  I  were  to  notice  that  the  principle  of  a 
State  contribution  were  to  be  definitely  rejected,  and  that 
the  legislative  assembly  of  the  country  were  to  vote  against 
State-contributions.  This  would  transfer  the  whole  mat- 
ter to  the  sphere  of  open  commerce,  if  I  may  say  so,  and  in 


SPEECHES  233 

that  case  it  might  be  better  to  leave  the  insurance  to  pri- 
vate enterprise  rather  than  to  establish  a  State-institution 
without  any  compulsion.  I  should  certainly  not  have  the 
courage  to  exercise  compulsion,  if  the  State  did  not  at 
the  same  time  make  a  contribution. 

If  compulsion  is  exercised,  it  is  necessary  for  the  law  to 
establish  a  department  of  insurance.  This  is  cheaper  and 
safer  than  any  company.  You  cannot  expose  the  savings 
of  the  poor  to  possible  insolvency,  nor  can  you  allow  any 
part  of  the  contributions  to  be  used  for  the  payment  of 
dividends  or  interest  on  stocks  and  bonds.  The  represen- 
tative Mr.  Bamberger  based  his  opposition  to  the  bill — 
you  remember  his  strong  words — largely  on  his  sorrow  at 
the  impending  ruin  of  the  insurance  companies.  He  said 
they  would  be  crushed  and  annihilated,  and  he  added,  that 
they  were  soliciting  the  gratitude  of  their  fellow-citizens. 
I  always  thought  they  were  soliciting  the  money  of  their  fel- 
low-citizens. If  in  addition  they  can  get  their  gratitude, 
they  are  turning  a  very  clever  trick.  That  they  should  be 
willing,  like  good  souls,  to  sacrifice  themselves  in  the  in- 
terest of  the  workingmen,  and  establish  their  institutions 
of  insurance  without  issuing  any  shares,  I  have  never  be- 
lieved, and  it  would  be  difficult  to  convince  me  of  it.  Ac- 
cording to  my  feeling  of  right  and  wrong,  we  cannot  force 
anybody  to  join  private  insurance  companies  which  may 
become  bankrupt  even  under  good  management,  owing  to 
fluctuations  in  the  market,  or  to  panics,  and  which  have 
to  arrange  their  premiums  so  that  dividends  are  realized 
for  those  who  are  investing  their  capital,  or  at  least  in- 
terest on  the  invested  money  and  the  hope  of  dividends. 
To  this  I  cannot  lend  my  assistance.  If  the  State  is  going 
to  exercise  compulsion,  it  must,  I  believe,  undertake  the 
insurance  itself.  It  may  be  the  empire  for  all,  or  the  in- 
dividual State — but,  without  this,  no  compulsion! 

Nor  have  I  the  courage,  as  I  have  already  said,  to  ex- 
ercise any  compulsion  if  I  cannot  offer  something  in  re- 
turn. This  contribution  of  a  third  is,  as  I  said  before, 


234  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

much  smaller  than  it  looks,  because  the  associations  will 
be  greatly  relieved  of  the  old  burdens  which  the  State 
had  imposed  on  them.  If  this  is  communism,  as  the  last 
speaker  called  it,  and  not  socialism,  I  do  not  care  one  iota. 
I  shall  call  it  again  and  again  "practical  Christianity  le- 
gally demonstrated."  If,  however,  it  is  communism,  then 
communism  has  been  extensively  practised  in  the  districts 
for  a  long  while,  and  actually  under  State  compulsion. 

The  previous  speaker  said  that  by  our  method  the  lower 
classes  would  be  oppressed  with  indirect  taxes  in  order 
to  collect  the  funds  for  the  care  of  the  poor  But  I  ask  you, 
gentlemen,  what  is  being  done  in  the  large  cities,  in  Berlin 
for  instance,  which  the  speaker  thinks  is  splendidly  gov- 
erned by  the  liberal  ring?  Here  the  poor  man  is  taken  care 
of  with  the  proceeds  of  the  tax  on  rents,  which  is  exacted 
of  his  slightly  less  poor  brother;  and  to-morrow  he  may 
have  this  brother  as  his  companion  in  misery,  when  a  war- 
rant is  executed  against  the  latter  for  the  non-payment  of 
this  tax.  That  is  more  cruel  than  if  the  payment  were 
made  from  the  tax  on  tobacco  or  on  alcohol. 

The  previous  speaker  said  that  I  had  spoken  against  the 
tax  on  alcohol.  I  really  do  not  remember  this,  and  I  should 
be  grateful  if  he  would  prove  this  by  quoting  one  word. 
I  have  always  mentioned  tobacco  and  alcohol  as  commodi- 
ties on  which  larger  taxes  should  be  levied,  but  I  have  ex- 
pressed a  doubt  whether  it  is  right  to  tax  the  alcohol  in  fac- 
tories while  it  is  being  made.  Many  States,  as  for  instance 
France,  do  not  levy  any  tax  on  alcohol,  or  assess  it  at  a 
different  time.  The  representative,  therefore,  has  made  a 
mistake — no  doubt  unintentionally.  When,  however,  this 
mistake  will  be  printed,  without  refutation,  in  many  papers, 
which  are  under  his  influence,  it  will,  I  am  sure,  make  no 
mean  impression. 

I  will  not  dilate  on  the  defects  of  the  law  of  liability, 
which  will  be  discussed  by  experienced  men,  who  have  had 
more  to  do  with  it  than  I.  These  defects,  however,  added 
their  weight  to  the  promise  we  made  when  the  law  against 


SPEECHES  235 

the  Socialists  was  promulgated — you  undoubtedly  remem- 
ber it  and  I  have  been  reminded  of  it  often  enough — and 
were  my  chief  reasons  for  submitting  to  you  the  present 
bill.  Our  present  law  of  liability  has  shown  surprisingly 
bad  results.  I  have  convinced  myself,  by  actual  occur- 
rences, that  the  suits  arising  under  this  law  often  termi- 
nate unexpectedly  and  unfairly,  if  they  are  successful.  And 
if  they  are  unsuccessful,  they  are  frequently  equally  un- 
fair. I  have  been  assured  by  many  creditable  people  that 
this  law  does  not  improve  the  relations  between  the  em- 
ployer and  the  employees.  On  the  contrary,  the  bitter  feel- 
ing between  them  is  increased,  wherever  there  are  many 
such  suits,  especially  where  there  are  shyster-lawyers  who 
like  to  sow  discord  with  an  eye  to  the  elections.  This  is  in 
strong  contrast  to  the  good  intentions  of  the  law.  The 
workingmen,  however,  consider  themselves  injured  by  it, 
because  not  even  a  decree  of  the  court  will  convince  them 
that  they  are  wrong,  especially  if  they  have  lawyers  who 
tell  them  they  are  right,  and  that  they  should  appeal  their 
cases  to  four  or  five  higher  courts,  if  there  were  as  many. 

These  observations  made  me  wish  to  introduce  a  system 
which  would  work  smoothly,  and  in  which  there  would  be 
no  question  of  suits-at-law,  or  investigations  into  anyone's 
culpability.  The  latter  is  quite  immaterial  for  him  who 
has  been  injured.  He  remains  unfortunate,  crippled,  and 
unable  to  earn  a  living,  if  this  has  been  his  lot,  or,  if  he 
has  been  killed,  his  family  is  left  without  its  bread-winner, 
whether  the  accident  was  due  to  criminal  neglect,  care- 
lessness, or  unavoidable  circumstances.  These  are  not  ques- 
tions of  corrective  or  distributive  justice,  but  of  protection. 
Without  a  proper  law  a  great  part  of  our  population  is 
helpless  before  the  hardships  of  life,  or  the  consequences 
of  an  accident.  Without  any  capital  of  their  own  these 
people  have  no  redress  against  the  cruelties  which  are  the 
lot  of  the  pauper  who  has  become  a  public  charge. 

I  will  not  reply  at  length  to  the  reproach  that  this  is  com- 
munism, but  I  should  like  to  ask  you  not  to  discuss  every- 


236  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

thing  from  the  point  of  view  of  party-strategy,  or  faction- 
strategy,  or  from  the  feeling  ' l  away  with  Bismarck. ' '  We 
have  to  do  here  with  matters  where  not  one  of  us  can  see  his 
way  clearly,  and  where  we  must  search  for  the  right  road 
with  sticks  and  sounding-rods.  I  should  like  to  see  another 
man  in  my  place  as  speedily  as  possible,  if  he  would  con- 
tinue my  work.  I  should  gladly  say  to  him,  ''Son,  take 
up  your  father's  spear,"  even  if  he  were  not  my  own  son. 
This  undesirable  way  of  discussing  matters  showed  itself 
the  other  day,  when  the  gentlemen  fought  for  "the  poor 
man,"  as  if  they  had  to  do  with  the  body  of  Patroclus. 
Mr.  Lasker  took  hold  of  him  at  one  end,  and  I  tried  to 
snatch  him  away  from  Mr.  Lasker  as  best  I  could.  But 
where  do  imputed  motives,  and  class-hatred,  and  the  ex- 
citement of  misery  and  suffering  lead  us?  Such  behavior 
comes  too  near  being  socialism  in  the  sense  in  which  Mr. 
von  Puttkamer  exposed  it  the  other  day. 

Alms  constitute  the  first  step  of  Christian  charity,  such 
as  must  exist  in  France,  for  instance,  to  a  great  extent. 
There  are  no  poor-laws  in  France,  and  every  poor  man  has 
the  right  to  starve  to  death  if  charitable  people  do  not 
prevent  him  from  doing  so.  Charity  is  the  first  duty,  and 
the  second  is,  the  assistance  given  by  districts  and  accord- 
ing to  law.  A  State,  however,  which  is  composed  very 
largely  of  Christians — even  if  you  are  horrified  at  hear- 
ing it  called  a  Christian  State, — should  let  itself  be  per- 
meated with  the  principles  which  it  confesses,  and  espe- 
cially with  those  which  have  to  do  with  the  help  of  our 
neighbors,  and  the  sympathy  one  feels  for  the  lot  which 
threatens  the  old  and  the  sick. 

The  extensive  discussions,  which  I  have  partly  heard, 
and  partly  read  in  the  Parliamentary  extracts  of  yesterday, 
compel  me  to  make  some  further  observations.  The  repre- 
sentative Mr.  Richter  has  said  that  the  whole  bill  amounted 
to  a  subsidy  of  the  big  industries.  Well,  here  again,  you 
have  an  instance  of  class-hatred,  which  would  receive  new 
fuel  if  his  words  were  true.  I  do  not  know  why  you  assume 


SPEECHES  237 

that  the  Government  cherishes  a  blind  and  special  love  for 
the  big  industries.  The  big  manufacturers  are,  it  is  true, 
children  of  fortune,  and  this  creates  no  good  will  toward 
them  among  the  rest  of  the  people.  But  to  weaken  or  to 
confine  their  existence  would  be  a  very  foolish  experiment. 
If  we  dropped  our  big  industries,  making  it  impossible  for 
them  to  compete  with  those  of  other  countries,  and  if  we 
placed  burdens  on  them  which  they  have  not  yet  been 
proved  able  to  bear,  we  might  meet  with  the  approval  of 
all  who  are  vexed  at  seeing  anybody  richer  than  other 
people,  most  especially  than  themselves.  But,  if  we  ruin 
the  big  industries,  what  shall  we  do  with  the  laborers?  In 
such  a  case  we  should  be  facing  the  problem,  to  which  the 
representative  Mr.  Bichter  referred  with  much  concern,  of 
the  organization  of  labor.  If  a  business,  employing 
twenty  thousand  laborers  and  more,  goes  to  pieces,  and  if 
the  big  industries  go  to  pieces,  because  they  have  been  de- 
nounced to  public  opinion  and  to  the  legislature  as  danger- 
ous and  liable  to  heavier  taxes,  we  could  not  let  twenty  thou- 
sand, and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  laborers  starve  to 
death.  In  such  a  case  we  should  have  to  organize  a  genu- 
ine State-socialism,  and  find  work  for  these  laborers,  sim- 
ilar to  what  we  have  been  doing  during  every  panic. 

If  the  objections  of  the  representative  Mr.  Eichter,  who 
claimed  that  we  must  guard  ourselves  against  State-so- 
cialism as  against  some  disease,  were  well  taken,  how  does 
it  happen  that  we  are  providing  work  whenever  a  calamity 
has  afflicted  one  or  another  of  the  provinces?  Such  work 
would  not  be  provided,  if  the  workingmen  could  find  other 
remunerative  occupations.  In  such  cases  we  build  rail- 
ways of  doubtful  productivity,  and  make  improvements, 
which  under  ordinary  circumstances  are  left  to  the  indi- 
vidual citizens  to  make.  If  this  is  communism,  I  am  by 
no  means  opposed  to  it.  But  the  use  of  such  catch-words 
does  not  advance  the  solution  of  any  problem. 

I  have  already  commented  on  Mr.  Bamberger's  defence 
of  the  private  insurance  companies.  I  am,  however,  con- 


238  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

vinced  that  we  are  not  called  upon  to  espouse  their  cause 
of  all  others  when  we  are  confronted  by  tremendous  eco- 
nomic needs.  He  has  also  referred  to  the  ''four  weeks" 
which  have  to  elapse  before  the  insurance  takes  effect. 
This  was  done  in  the  hope  that  the  unions  and  societies 
would  wish  to  do  something  themselves.  We  are  always 
told  that  the  laborers  deem  insurance  to  be  contrary  to 
their  honor,  unless  they  contribute  something  toward  it. 
For  this  reason  we  have  left  the  first  four  weeks  uninsured. 
I  am  not  certain  on  this  point,  but  if  another  solution  seems 
better,  I  believe  that  the  law  should  cover  also  this  hiatus. 
There  is  no  fundamental  objection  to  this. 

One  single  fact  will  throw  much  light  on  the  considerable 
burdens  of  which  the  county  communities  will  be  relieved 
when  the  care  of  their  poor  will  pass,  according  to  this 
bill,  to  the  community  of  the  State.  I  have  been  unable 
i»  ascertain  the  number  of  persons  to  whom  assistance  is 
given  in  the  empire  «r  in  the  kingdom  of  Prussia,  and  even 
less  to  discover  the  amount  of  money  spent  for  this  purpose. 
In  the  country,  and  elsewhere,  private  charity  and  public 
help  are  so  intermingled  that  it  is  impossible  to  separate 
them,  or  to  keep  accurate  accounts.  The  one  hundred  and 
seventy  cities,  however,  which  have  more  than  ten  thousand 
inhabitants  expend  on  the  average  four  marks  per  capita 
for  the  care  of  their  poor.  This  item  varies  between  0.63 
mark  and  12.84  marks — a  great  variation  as  you  see.  The 
most  remarkable  results  are  found  where  the  majority  of 
laborers  are  banded  together  in  unions  or  similar  associa- 
tions. It  would  be  natural  to  think  that  places  like  Ober- 
neunkirchen  and  Duttweiler  with  large  factory  populations 
would  have  a  very  large  budget  for  the  poor ;  and  that  Ber- 
lin, which  is  only  in  part  an  industrial  centre,  would  be  an 
average  locality,  for  our  purposes,  if  its  finances  were  well 
managed.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  pays  far  more  than 
the  average  for  the  care  of  its  poor  without  doing  this 
exceptionally  well.  Anyone  who  is  interested  in  private 
charities,  and  cares  to  visit  the  poor  of  Berlin,  will  be  con- 


SPEECHES  239 

vinced  of  their  pitiful  condition.  Nevertheless,  the  Berlin 
budget  for  the  poor  amounts  to  5,000,000  marks — these  are 
the  latest  figures — and  for  the  care  of  the  sick  poor  to 
1,900,000  marks.  Why  these  two  items  should  be  separated 
I  do  not  know.  Together,  therefore,  they  amount  to  about 
7,000,000  marks,  or  7  marks  per  capita,  while  the  average 
of  the  large  cities  is  4  marks.  If  such  a  poor-tax  of  7 
marks  per  capita  were  extended  to  the  whole  empire,  it 
would  yield  300,000,000  marks;  and  if  the  direct  taxes  of 
Berlin,  amounting  to  23  marks  per  capita,  were  levied  on  the 
empire,  we  should  receive  more  than  one  milliard  marks  in 
direct  taxes,  including  those  on  rents  and  incomes.  For- 
tunately not  all  the  people  of  the  empire  are  living  under 
a  liberal  ring,  and  least  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  cities  where 
the  majority  of  the  workingmen  have  joined  unions  or  sim- 
ilar associations.  We  have  discovered  the  remarkable  fact 
that  Oberneunkirchen  with  its  large  factory  population 
pays  only  0.58  mark,  and  Duttweiler  0.72  mark  per  capita 
for  the  care  of  their  poor. 

These  are  instances  which  throw  light  on  the  relief  of  the 
communities  if  a  system  similar  to  that  of  the  unions  would 
be  introduced.  I  do  not  at  all  intend  to  make  so  expensive  a 
proposition  to  you,  and  I  have  already  said  that  we  shall 
have  to  work  on  this  legislation  for  at  least  a  generation. 
But  look  at  the  glaring  examples  of  Duttweiler  and  Ober- 
neunkirchen. Without  their  unions  their  budgets  for  the 
poor  would  perhaps  not  rise  to  the  Berlin  figure,  but  they 
would  easily  amount  to  5  marks  per  capita.  Actually,  how- 
ever, they  are  less  than  1  mark,  and  almost  as  low  as  ^ 
mark.  What  a  tremendous  burden  will  be  taken  from  the 
charity  departments  of  a  city  of  ten  thousand  inhabitants  by 
a  law  like  the  one  under  discussion!  Why,  then,  should 
they  not  be  asked  to  make  some  kind  of  a  contribution  to 
the  insurance  fund?  But  the  contributions  should  not  be 
made  by  the  districts,  but  by  larger  units,  and,  since  the 
State  is  the  largest,  I  insist  that  the  contributions  should 
be  made  by  the  State.  If  you  do  not  yield  in  this  point  to 


240  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

the  allied  governments,  I  shall  look  placidly,  and  without 
being  offended,  toward  further  discussions  and  another  ses- 
sion of  the  Reichstag.  This  I  consider  to  be  the  all-im- 
portant part  of  the  law,  and  without  it  the  bill  would  no 
longer  appear  to  me  to  be  as  valuable  as  I  have  thought  it 
was,  and  would  seem  to  lack  the  chief  characteristic  which 
induced  me  to  become  its  sponsor. 

The  previous  speaker  and  the  Honorable  Mr.  Bamberger 
have  looked  askance  at  the  Economic  Council.  This,  gentle- 
men, was  perfectly  natural,  for  competition  in  eloquence  is 
as  much  disliked  as  in  business ;  and  there  are  in  this  Coun- 
cil not  only  men  of  exceptionally  great  practical  knowledge, 
but  also  some  very  good  speakers.  When  the  Council  has 
been  more  firmly  established  these  men  will  perhaps  deliver 
as  long  and  expert  speeches  as  those  representatives  are 
doing  who  pass  themselves  off  as  the  expert  spokesmen  of 
labor.  I  really  do  not  consider  it  to  be  polite,  or  politically 
advantageous,  to  refer  to  the  councillors  who  have  come 
here,  at  the  call  of  their  king,  to  voice  their  honest  opinions 
with  as  much  contempt  as  the  representatives  whom  I  have 
mentioned  have  done.  Most  woods  return  the  echo  of  what 
we  call  into  them;  and  why  should  the  representative  Mr. 
Richter  unnecessarily  make  for  himself  even  more  enemies 
than  he  has?  He  is  like  me,  in  that  the  number  of  his  op- 
ponents is  growing,  and  is  no  longer  small.  His  ear,  how- 
ever, is  not  so  keen  as  mine  to  detect  the  existence  of  an 
opponent,  and  I  am  satisfied  to  wait  and  see  which  one  of 
us  in  the  long  run  will  appear  to  have  been  right.  Possi- 
bly, this  may  not  be  decided  in  our  lifetime.  That  also  will 
be  agreeable  to  me. 

The  representative  Mr.  Bamberger  has  expressed  his  as- 
tonishment, in  discussing  matters  with  the  Council,  that  the 
delegates  of  the  sea-coast  cities  had  been  granted  the  right 
to  decide  about  questions  relating  to  gunpowder  and  play- 
ing-cards. Well,  gentlemen,  the  delegates  from  the  inland 
districts  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  from  the  sea- 
coast,  and  we  have  not  made  this  division  arbitrarily.  Since 


SPEECHES  241 

we  look  upon  the  free-trade  theory  as  an  epidemic,  which 
is  afflicting  us  like  the  Colorado  Beetle,  or  similar  evils,  you 
cannot  possibly  expect  that  we  should  ask  the  free  traders 
to  represent  the  whole  country  in  matters  where  we  happen 
to  have  the  choice.  Generally  speaking,  the  free  traders 
represent  the  interests  of  maritime  commerce,  of  mer- 
chants, and  of  a  very  few  other  people.  Opposed  to  them  is 
the  much  greater  weight  of  all  the  inland  districts.  The 
more,  therefore,  the  Economic  Council  will  be  perfected, 
the  more  the  propriety  and  reasonableness  of  the  present 
arrangement  will  be  appreciated.  The  Council  has,  to  my 
great  delight,  excellent  chances  of  extending  its  usefulness 
over  the  whole  empire.  These  remarks  will  scarcely  win 
me,  I  believe,  the  good  graces  of  Messrs.  Eichter  and  Bam- 
berger.  If  they  did,  it  would  be  for  me  an  argumentum  e 
contrario.  I  am  always  of  the  opinion  that  the  very  oppo- 
site of  their  views  is  serviceable  for  the  State  and  the  in- 
terests of  the  fatherland,  as  I  understand  them. 

I  have  already  replied  to  the  reproach  of  home-social- 
ism. One  of  the  previous  speakers,  however,  goes  so  far 
as  to  identify  me  with  foreigners,  because  I  am  glad  to  as- 
sume the  responsibility  for  this  law  and  its  intellectual  ori- 
gin. These  foreigners  are,  no  doubt,  excellent  men,  but 
they  have  nothing  to  do  with  our  affairs.  They  are  men 
like  Nadaud,  Clemenceau,  Spuller,  Lockroy,  and  others.  I 
believe  this  was  intended  to  be  a  complicated  reproach  of 
both  socialism  and  communism.  You  see,  it  is  always  the 
same  tune.  Then  he  mentioned  the  "intrepidity,"  which  I 
translate  for  myself  to  mean  the  "frivolous  levity,"  of  the 
government  in  suggesting  such  matters.  The  considerate 
politeness  of  the  speaker  induced  him  to  call  it  "intrepid- 
ity." Gentlemen,  our  intrepidity  springs  from  our  good 
conscience.  We  are  convinced  that  what  we  are  proposing 
is  the  result  of  dutiful  and  careful  consideration,  and  is 
not  in  the  least  tinged  with  party-politics.  In  this  we  are 
superior  to  our  opponents,  who  will  never  be  able  to  free 

VOL.  X— 10 


242  THE  GERMAN  CLASSICS 

themselves  from  the  soil  of  party-warfare  which  clings  to 
their  boots. 

The  previous  speaker  compared  us  also  with  the  Romans. 
You  see  he  made  his  historical  excursions  not  only  into 
France,  but  also  into  the  past.  The  difference  between  Mr. 
Bamberger 's  and  our  point  of  view — which  Mr.  Lasker  may 
call  aristocratic,  if  he  chooses — appears  in  his  very  choice 
of  words.  Mr.  Bamberger  spoke  of  theatres  which  we  were 
erecting  for  the  " sweet  rabble."  Whether  there  is  anything 
sweet  in  the  rabble  for  Mr.  Bamberger  I  do  not  know.  But 
we  are  filled  with  satisfaction  at  the  thought  that  we  may 
be  able  to  do  something  in  the  legislature  for  the  less  for- 
tunate classes — whom  he  designates  as  rabble — and  to  wrest 
them,  if  you  will  grant  the  money,  from  the  evil  influences 
of  place-hunters  whose  eloquence  is  too  much  for  their  in- 
telligence. 

The  expression  "rabble"  did  not  fall  from  our  lips,  and 
if  the  representative  spoke  of  the  "rabble"  first,  and  after- 
wards of  "those  who  cut  off  coupons,"  I  deny  having  used 
also  this  word.  "To  cut  off  coupons"  is  linguistically  not 
familiar  to  me.  I  believe  I  said  "those  who  cut  coupons." 
The  meaning,  of  course,  remains  the  same.  But  let  me  re- 
mark that  I  consider  this  class  of  people  to  be  highly  esti- 
mable, and  from  a  minister's  point  of  view  exceedingly  de- 
sirable, because  they  combine  wealth  with  that  degree  of 
diffidence  which  keeps  them  from  all  tainted  or  dangerous 
enterprises.  The  man  who  pays  a  large  tax  and  loves  peace 
is  from  the  ministerial  point  of  view  the  most  agreeable  of 
citizens.  He  must,  of  course,  not  try  to  escape  the  burdens 
which  his  easily  collected  income  should  bear  in  compari- 
son with  others.  And  you  will  see  that  he  really  does  not 
do  it.  He  is  an  honest  man,  and  when  we  shall  at  last  have 
outgrown  the  finance-ministerial  mistrust  of  olden  times— 
which  my  present  colleagues  no  longer  share — we  shall  see 
that  not  everybody  is  willing  to  lie  for  his  own  financial 
benefit,  and  that  even  the  man  who  cuts  coupons  will  de- 
clare his  wealth  honestly,  and  pay  his  taxes  accordingly. 


SPEECHES  243 

The  Honorable  Mr.  Bamberger  also  asked:  "Where  will 
you  find  the  necessary  money?"  This  law  really  implies 
few  new  expenses,  as  I  have  already  said,  because  all  the 
government  asks  is  to  be  permitted  to  substitute  the  State 
for  the  communities,  which  at  present  are  taking  care  of  the 
poor,  and  to  make  a  very  modest  allowance  to  those  who 
cannot  earn  their  living.  This  allowance  should  be  entirely 
at  the  disposal  of  the  recipient  and  be  inalienable  from 
him.  It  will  thus  secure  for  him  independence  even  when 
he  is  an  invalid.  The  increase  over  the  present  cost  of  car- 
ing for  the  poor  is  slight.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  should 
be  estimated  at  half  of  one-third — one  sixth — or  even  at  less. 

I  am,  therefore,  of  the  opinion  that  a  State  which  is  at 
war  with  the  infernal  elements  recently  described  to  you 
here  in  detail,  and  which  possesses  among  its  citizens  an 
overwhelming  majority  of  sincere  adherents  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion,  should  do  for  the  poor,  the  weak,  and  the  old 
much  more  than  this  bill  demands — as  much  as  I  hope  to  be 
able  to  ask  of  you  next  year.  And  such  a  State,  especially 
when  it  wishes  to  demonstrate  its  practical  Christianity, 
should  not  refuse  our  demands,  for  its  own  sake  and  for  the 
sake  of  the  poor  1
